 This was the action brought by the plaintiff to recover damages for a malicious prosecution instituted by the defendant. - The damages were laid at £1000.  The declaration in this action contained two counts. The 1st set forth that the defendant on the 17th day of November last at Parramatta went before Mr. James M'Arthur one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the colony and charged plaintiff with having feloniously killed and slayed an ox the property of said defendant. On this charge the Magisrates [sic] granted a warrant authorising the taking into custody the body of plaintiff and bringing his person before the Magistrates at the police bench at Cawdor. That the said plaintiff was arrested remained in custody for the space of seven days; and was eventually committed to take his trial before the Supreme Court. The Attorney General refused to present an information.  The examinations at the Police Office were put in - H.C. Antill Esq. J.P. examined - Knows that the depositions put in were taken - witness proved the various signatures.  W. Wilkes - Knew Doyle a stock-keeper in plaintiff's employment - he is now dead - recollects once having had a conversation with him on the subject of a bullock which was in plaintiff's possession - heard defendant's servant man tell plaintiff's servant that his master (meaning defendant) would let Klensendorff have the bullock for £7 and he might then do as he liked with it.  Cross-examined - Two other men named Cooling and Stockwell were present at this conversation.  W. Scott - Is a constable - was at Bong Bong in the month of June last year - attended a sale of cattle there plaintiff was there and bought three head - recollects a strayed ox which was then in pound rushing out and joining Klensendorlff's cattle - a short time after defendant told witness that Klensendorlff had killed a bullock belonging to him and said that it was the same beast which joined his cattle on leaving Bong Bong at the sale. Witness then acquainted defendant of the manner in which plaintiff became possessed of the animal as he before related - defendant observed that he however would prosecute Klensendorlff for killing the bullock.  Joseph Wild - saw the bullock in question get away in the manner described by last witness - endeavoured to draft the beast from Klensendorff' [sic] herd but was unsuccessful - the strange beast was rather wild - considered it best to run it with the other cattle which it had joined to plaintiff's farm - assisted in doing so - on reaching there drove the cattle into a stock yard and drafted the wild animal from the others by roping him to a fence when in the yard.  Robert Rowe - Was present at the delivery of a message by plaintiff's servant man from defendant's servant that his master was agreeable he (Klensendorff) should have the bullock for 7 l.  H. Wrensford - Was in the employ of Alex. Still in November last - has heard defendant say in speaking on the business of the bullock being killed that he should now have an opportunity of retaliating on Klensendorlff - has heard defendant speak of plaintiff in the terms "a pure Merino" - believes this to be a cant word for free settler - defendant said "although Klensendorlff came out here free I'll soon make a convict of him if he does not keep a sharp look out;" or words to that effect - witness kept a diary on the farm - entered therein every minute circumstance which transpired in the course of the day.  Mr. G. Brown examined - Is innkeeper at Liverpool - remembers defendant saying on one occasion in speaking of plaintiff about this business that Klensendorlff had had a run for a long while - that he had been on the look out for him - had got him at last and would settle him - he seemed to speak this in a very malignant tone - defendant added that he would stop Klensendorlff's galloping if it cost him (Oakes) 1000£ - that he had some good fat cattle up the new country could soon get them down - and this he would do if necessary to prosecute him.  Mr. John Cullen - Heard defendant in allusion to plaintiff say that he did not think he would ride much longer in his chaise - that he would "clear him off" now - would stick to him for killing his bullock - said he would "lag" him meaning transporting him. This was spoken in a malicious tone.  Cross-examined - understood by the word "clear him off" that it alluded to plaintiff who keeps a public house and is said to let people leave his house generally with empty pockets when they get drunk there.  Mr. J. Kelly had seen the beast spoken of by the other witnesses - considered its fair worth to be about £7.  Mr. John Ikin - was chief constable at Liverpool last year - he took plaintiff into custody - he was under an arrest for seven days - he was under arrest with a strict proviso that the prisoner was to have no communication with any person - brought him to Sydney in his company - has heard defendant express himself in very malicious terms of plaintiff - recollects defendant once taking out his pocket-book and holding a cheque on the bank for 350£ in his hand - said he had just received it for some bullocks he had sold and would spend the last farthing of it and more if necessary for the trial.  Thomas Moore Esq. - is Justice of the Peace in the district of Liverpool - some time in the latter part of last year defendant came to him and requested a search warrant to discover a hide which had been taken from the carcase [sic] of a bullock he stated to have been feloniously slaughtered by Mr. Klensendorlff witness gave it as his impression that Mr. K. would not be guilty of any such act - witness as also Mr. Oakes were at this time aware how the bullock had come into plaintiff's possession - witness gave his opinion that there was a mistake in the business -- and further stated that under the whole circumstances of the case he could not see how the alleged offence could possibly be construed into a felony - defendant on this occasion said "cost what it will I'm determined to prosecute him" - he seemed to speak in a very determined and hasty manner considers plaintiff to be a man of property - is not acquainted with defendant's circumstances.  William Lithgow Esq. examined - remembers an application having been made to the government some time ago by plaintiff for a grant of land - this was towards the close of Sir Thomas Brisbane's administration - in the absence of the Private Secretary was directed by his Excellency to communicate to Mr. Klensendorlff that the prayer of his petition for a grant of land cold not be acceded to as his conduct was then under investigation on a charge of felony.  William Fletcher - was gaoler and constable in June last year - was authorised by warrant to take plaintiff's person into custody arrested him when riding in company with one of the Magistrates - it was court-day at Liverpool - there were a number of persons present - knows plaintiff was committed to gaol - witness represented to the Bench that there was no room in the gaol - plaintiff was in consequence given into the custody of the chief constable.  On behalf of the defendant it was objected that the action did not lie because the plaintiff must be non-suited on the ground that the charges made by the defendant as appeared on the affidavits did not amount to felony and the committing Magistrate had erred in his judgment for committing the plaintiff for felony and for this the defendant could not in law be accountable - that the defendant in submitting his complaint to the Magistrate had merely stated facts from which no inference of felony could be drawn.  The Chief Justice said he was inclined to put the case to the Assessors on the evidence - raising the point for after-consideration on a special verdict - it was a critical point and one in which at present his Honor would give no opinion.  Mr. Saxe Bannister examined - received two letters directed to him as Attorney-General on the subject of a charge preferred by the defendant against plaintiff respecting a bullock which it was alleged the former had stolen. The first letter he received on the 31st of December - it was a requisition to him to prefer a criminal information against the said plaintiff - did not do so - advised the present defendant to enter an action in trover to recover the amount of the beast - and on the issue of that it would depend whether he filed a criminal information.  Mr. James MacArthur - is one of the Magistrates for the district of Cawdor - recollects several witnesses being examined at that Bench relative to this affair - the Cawdor Bench is the nearest Court to Myrtle Creek the residence of plaintiff - any witnesses he wished to send for he might have had by applying to the Bench - has heard a report of a charge having been made on a former occasion against plaintiff for felony - had no better opinion of him before that transaction at the Court than he has at the present moment - considers plaintiff to be a very litigious person.  Cross-examined - means the former act of felony to be a something of difference between relations a long time ago - is not aware that it is the common practice for Magistrates to refuse evidence in favor of persons under examination for felony - has been a Magistrate about 12 months - during which time several cases of felony have come before him - if accused parties wish evidence to be heard in their favor that request is complied with - when there does not appear to the Bench to be sufficient evidence to commit at once - or where doubts may exist as to the guilt of the accused. Witness committed plaintiff under the impression that a felony had been committed - instructions were given to Iken the chief constable to be present at any conversations he might have had with any one - believes plaintiff was not commited on the first day in order that he might have time to bring his evidence on the next Court day.  Alexander Still sworn - knows Mr. Wrensford - he has been a witness in the case - would not believe him on his oath - considers plaintiff a very litigious man.  Cross-examined - Wrensford and witness are at varience.  Daniel Stockwell - is a servant to defendant - remembers the bullock in question was left behind on the road not far from Bung Bung - it was "knocked up" - was obliged to leave it behind - the beast was afterwards impounded in the town - enquired of several persons about the beast - among others asked plaintiff's wife - she denied all knowledge of it - afterwards spoke to one of plaintiff's stockmen - he told him the bullock was on their run - saw the animal - told the plaintiff of it - did not send any message to plaintiff as coming from his master (defendant) by any one - never did so by "Doyle" - plaintiff told witness he would give defendant 5 l. 10s. for the bullock - endeavoured to drive the beast to defendant's farm but could not - it was too wild.  Cross-examined - witness never told his master of the offer plaintiff made.  Re-examined is quite certain his master never said he would take any money for the bullock.  Thomas Cooling - was arrested in September last at the instance of plaintiff for debt - was present with Doyle in Sydney at the conversation in Hunter-street - heard nothing said about a message from defendant to plaintiff respecting the bullock - must have heard it if any thing had passed on the subject - has not been brought up from gaol to give evidence - received no message from plaintiff a short time ago - he promised to do great things for him - among others restore him to liberty if he spoke the truth relative to this business - understood from that that plaintiff wished him to perjure himself.  Here the defence closed.  Mr. George Brown recalled for the plaintiff - was present with Mr. Klensendorffe at defendant's house when the witness Stockwell told him and Mr. K. that he had delivered plaintiff's message to defendant sent by him about the purchase of the bollock. [sic]  Mr. Blake - was called to invalidate the same witness's testimony.  Solomon Solomon's [sic] - that of Coolings.  His Honor summed up - at that late hour of the night (8 oclok [sic]) he should not traverse over the wide field of evidence which had been collected together; but should as briefly as possible descant on those points which had their bearings on the cases - rejecting all extraneous matter and drawing the attention of the assessors to those parts of the evidence which had their connexion with the case either for or against - with that resolution he would proceed observing by the way that he had thought it prudent to reserve the question as to felony &c. for an after hearing - having this object in view - in giving a decision therein hereafter he might have full leisure to examine and attend to what he would then profess appeared to him a very critical and nice point; and in order that there should be no occasion for a new trial hereafter seeing what inconvenience would result on account of such a vast number of witnesses having to be subpoenaed and they too scattered and at so great a distance from the interior: his Honor would therefore go at once into the evidence and state in the outset that taking the whole evidence together he must give it as his opinion that there did not appear on the plaintiff's part any intention to commit felony - there was enough to satisfy the mind of defendant that plaintiff had no intention to steal the bullock - which appeared to be a circumstance generally known throughout the country at least so it would seem from so many persons then before the Court who were acquainted with the facts - there were a number of evidences who spoke to those facts and if the Jury believed them it would go at once to disprove the presumption of a felony - there was some respectable evidence and he was always desirous of setting up the most unimpeached testimony leaving Wrensford's evidence out of the case but it was for the Jury to give what credit they pleased to that - there was Mr. Browne's evidence to which no objection had been made - there was also Mr. Moore's testimony - both of whom spoke of the rash and intemperate expressions used by defendant - especially the word "lag" - what must be inferred from that - it could not be an expression coming from a mind in pursuit of honest temperate justice? - Mr. Moore had very properly told him there did not appear to him any thing like felony committed in the case - but defendant said he would prosecute. Taking therefore those unobjectionable evidences did it not go to shew that there was malignant feelings in the defendant's mind from some course or other? supposing then the Assessors should be of the same opinion their next consideration would be to estimate the damages. It appeared that plaintiff was a man of good possessions - he had land and stock and was in a respectable way - witnesses had come forward to impeach his character - that was open for the defendant to do to rebut the averment of general good character in order to prove that plaintiff had sustained no injury - but from what could be collected it seemed he was a litigious man - that was the substance of what the witnesses had said - nothing could be found to go further than that - but because a man was litigious surely he was not to be charged with a felony - plaintiff was then to be considered a respectable person - he was taken into confinement although from its nature it was no doubt a gentle mode of treating him - but he is put to inconvenience defamation in character for which he would be entitled to compensation by damages at their hands. - With respect to the specific damage it was difficult to know the value of the land of which it was set forth plaintiff was refused in consequences of the prosecution and besides it was impossible for the Court to say whether supposing the reason which was assigned for its refusal at that time even had not an existence than that the plaintiff should have had a grant given - and if even he had what would be the quantity - however there must certainly be some damage and it would be for the Jury to judge the measure of it.  A Special Verdict at the suggestion of the Chief Justice was returned - Damages £50 - subject to the opinion of the Court as to whether the charge amounted to a charge of felony.   Forsyth v. Forbes  This was an application to the Court for a new trial in the above cause grounded on various objections taken to the learned Judge's direction to the Jury in summing up the evidence on the late trial. Mr. Norton opposed the application which was supported at considerable length by Mr. W. C. Wentworth.  The Chief Justice in delivering the judgment of the Court observed that nothing which had been alleged by Counsel in support of the Rule had given him the least reason for hesitation in deciding upon the merits of the application. Nearly the same testimony and the same facts had been twice before him and were therefore the more likely to make a deep impression. Even if the evidence on a former trial had operated (as had been observed by Counsel) on his mind so as to blend facts it would be more serviceable to the plaintiff in the present action as on that trial the Court had the evidence of Mr. Hall which evidence if taken into consideration on the present occasion would be favourable to the plaintiff. There were three grounds upon which the application was made and he would in the first instance remark upon the last of the three which was that when he sat on the late trial he omitted to state to the Jury the circumstance of an injunction having been obtained against the defendant. That objection certainly would have been material if it appeared to the Court by any evidence before it that after the appointment of a receiver the particular property the subject of the action had been delivered over to such receiver. But was it not extraordinary that such receiver never took possession? How was that circumstance to be accounted for except upon the presumption which naturally arose from his not having taken any step to get possession that he did not consider himself entitled to it? But the doctrine of presumption was that it only held good in the absence of facts; in the case before the Court they had positive proof that the property was in the possession of the defendant. His Honor was therefore perfectly clear upon that subject though granting that he did omit taking notice of the point in his direction to the Jury were there any cases in the books to shew that a mere omission in the charge of a Judge as to a part of the evidence which the Jury had heard was urged as a ground for granting a new trial. It was the object of that Court and of all other Courts to grant new trials where it appeared that injustice had been done; but it was also held for the interest of the Public and to put an end to litigation that a misdirection on the part of a Judge where substantial justice had been done by the verdict of a Jury was no ground for granting a new trial. With regard to the second objection it had been admitted by Counsel that His Honor did not put it to the Jury that such and such was the fact but from Mr. Henry Hall's testimony such and such appeared. It should be remembered that matters of fact were solely for the consideration of the Jury who were equally competent to judge of the weight due to particular testimony and though the evidence was contradictory yet at the same time in contradictory-testimony the Jury were not bound to believe one party more than another. They no doubt founded their verdict upon the whole of the evidence before them and it was held that the circumstance of the Jury coming to a conclusion in favour of one side more than another was no ground for a new trial as to decide on the evidence was wholly within their province. Respecting the last ground of objection the first in order taken by the learned Counsel namely that His Honor had stated to the Jury that the plaintiff was precisely in the same situation as the person from whom he had purchased the bullock he observed if he considered in giving that as his opinion he had been wrong there would have been some ground for granting a new trial. But His Honor was even more fixed on that than any other point. He was still of opinion that Mr. Forsyth who purchased the bullock stood exactly in the same position as the person who sold it so long as the deed of mortgage remained unrevoked. He was not then considering the equitable claims of the firm of Eagar and Forbes but whether a mortgagor could justify by his own act and deed in assigning over property to Mr. Forsyth the plaintiff. His Honor was certainly of opinion he could not as he had no power to exercise any authority over the property except by discharging the amount of the lien on it. Considering therefore the whole of the case and with a view to putting an end to strife which could not prove of any advantage His Honor would refuse the application as he thought he should do an act of injustice even to the parties concerned by granting a new trial seeing that he should again most certainly give precisely the same directions and another Jury would most probably come to the same conclusion. Rule discharged.  John Laurie was indicted for stealing a boat the property of William Ternan at Sydney on the 2d of June 1824.  The Attorney General stated the case. The charge against the prisoner was for stealing a boat so long back as June 1824. The circumstances under which it was taken would perhaps raise a point of law for the consideration of the Court as to whether supposing the original intention of the prisoner in possessing himself of the boat to be innocent whether the subsequent wrong conversion constituted merely a trespass or a felony as charged in the indictment. The boat which was the subject of the prosecution was hired by the prisoner and others for a day and was not returned until forcibly taken possession of by a person not the owner but having his authority. It was for the Jury then to consider whether the original taking under all the circumstances which would be brought before them was innocent; or whether at any time after supposing the first taking to be innocent there was an improper conversion. On the 1st or 2d of June 1824 a person applied to the owner to have his boat for a day and on the following morning some persons among whom was the prisoner came and took possession of it with every appearance of preparation for a day's excursion in the harbour; but in place of being applied to the avowed purpose for which it was obtained it was shortly after used in getting water on board a small vessel called the Fame which lay out at some distance in the harbour. The water was all got in by the evening and on the following morning the vessel set sail towing the boat at her stern and which was no more seen until subsequently found in the possession of the prisoner at Two-fold Bay a considerable distance on the south coast of New Holland. The sloop itself was regularly cleared out for Newcastle which circumstance clearly demonstrated a fraudulent purpose as it would be shewn that she was not driven to the situation where she was found; and that in fact there was no intention whatever of proceeding to Newcastle. There were other circumstances also which would serve to mark the nature of the transaction; the owner's name which had been painted on the stern of the boat had been erased and the cargo which had been put on board the Fame under pretence of goods for Newcastle was in reality stores for a sea voyage of some considerable length. These facts would be proved by the testimony of witnesses against whom no objection could be raised and also by others which the Jury might think were involved in the transaction but they would however be obliged to receive in evidence and listen to it only so far as it should be supported by testimony against which there was not taint.  Mr. Robert Crawford deposed that an application was made at the Secretary's Office for a clearance for a vessel called the Fame on the 19th of May 1824 which was obtained.  Cross-examined by Dr. Wardell - An application for a clearance to proceed on a coasting voyage is granted as a matter of course; it is directed to another officer who makes the necessary examination and muster on board.  William Ternan deposed that he lived in Sydney and keeps boats for hire; on the 1st or 2d of June 1824 in the afternoon a man named Oldfield came to witness and hired a boat from him to go shooting in the harbour on the next day and for which witness received two dumps which was the regular hire; on the following morning Oldfield came and witness delivered to him 2 oars and carried the others himself and proceeded with him down to the shore where the boat lay in Cockle-bay; the prisoner was there waiting with 2 others and his son; he entered into conversation with witness and said to him "old man that's a fine boat of yours have you got the dumps?" Witness observing that the party were well dressed said to Laurie that he had better take one of his (witness's) men to pull when Laurie replied there was no occasion as they would be back by seven o'clock. The prisoner and his son Oldfield and a man witness did not know then went down the harbour in the boat which witness did not again see until November when she was brought up to Sydney by Captain Griffiths and restored by him to witness upon paying £2.  Cross-examined. -- Oldfield hired the boat the preceding day; there were sails to the boat which he left behind upon witness telling him that the wind was contrary; witness has mentioned the circumstances to Mr. Wentworth to Captain Griffiths and to the sailors belonging to the Glory; has never mentioned it to any one else except merely saying that he had lost his boat; witness gave a history of the transaction in the Paper which he thinks corresponded with what he has now stated; never said to any person that it was to Oldfield alone that he had hired the boat and to him only would he look for her return; never said to any one that all he looked for was for the hire of his boat while she was away and that he did not think she was stolen; never told Laurie himself nor any other person that he did not think he had any thing to do with taking away the boat; Laurie did not hire the boat at all it was delivered to Oldfield and the oars were handed to him; witness would have given it to Oldfield if Laurie had not been there at all and would have looked to him for it; Laurie said they would return at 7-o'clock but persons do not always return to the time; many causes might prevent them; witness would not have though [sic] any thing if they had only staid away a day beyond their time.  Richard Stewart alias Green deposed that he was one of the party who proceeded in a boat belonging to the last witness from Cockle-bay on the 2d of June last; heard Laurie ask Oldfield if he had given the money to Ternan for the boat; the Fame was lying near Garden Island when they proceeded on board; Laurie sent the boat off in search of water and it did not return until the following morning when they set sail about 9 o'clock; they made towards the Southward; the wind was contrary but they might have made Newcastle in three days; the boat was towed at the stern of the Fame; it had the owner's name painted on it which was defaced by Apsey while Laurie and Oldfield were below; Oldfield was angry when he perceived the name had been erased and told Apsey it was very wrong as it was another man's boat; Laurie only laughed; they lay in Two-fold-bay four or five days before Captain Griffiths took them in charge; he asked whose boat it was and Laurie said it was his.  Cross-examined. - Witness has been sentenced to Port Macquarie for three years for his share in the transaction; is a prisoner of the crown; their intention was to escape from the Colony. Laurie never endeavoured to persuade Apsey to go to the Northward; Apsey was captain of the Fame; witness has been King's evidence before; the intention in getting the boat was merely to procure water and then to return it by Laurie's son; when they got to the heads Oldfield requested that Laurie would then send back the boat as it was previously agreed which he refused saying that his son should go the voyage with him.  Mr. Charles Grey clerk to the Naval Officer deposed that the Fame cleared out in the month of May 1824 for Newcastle.  William Oldfield examined. - Previously to hiring the boat witness Stewart and Apsey had a meeting at Laurie's house when it was suggested that the Fame could not sail without first having a boat to put water on board; it was then observed by Laurie that he had been in the habit of hiring boats of Ternan and that if one was procured from him his (Laurie's) son should go with them as far as the Heads and then return with the boat; they went to sea the following morning with the boat towed to the stern of the Fame; when they arrived at the Heads Laurie refused to allow his son to return with the boat; the owner's name was afterwards erased by Apsey; Laurie laughed when he perceived it.  Cross examined. - There was no water on board the Fame and it was the original intention to obtain the boat merely to procure water.  Jonathan Griffiths deposed that he met the prisoner and others in Two-fold Bay on the 24th of June 1824; there was an advertisement in the newspaper proclaiming them as runaways; there was a small boat which witness knew to belong to Ternan towed at the stern of the Fame Laurie said it was his; witness took possession of it and restored it to Ternan at Sydney.  Cross-examined. Had to pay £480 in consequence of that job but expects that it will find its way back; it is attached in the hands of Mr. Stephen at Van Diemen's Land; witness is not the chief mover and instigator of these proceedings in order that Laurie's conviction might set aside that judgment.  The case for the prosecution having closed Dr. Wardell submitted to the Court that the information against the prisoner should fall on two grounds. In the first place the law as laid down by the Attorney General did not exist; namely that if the original intention was innocent and that a subsequent conversion took place that it altered the complexion of the case at the beginning. On the authority of a case then before him in Leech 411 he contended that to constitute a felony the original intention must be felonious and any subsequent conversion was only a breach of trust. The second objection he should make was that there was no evidence to shew that Laurie was as charged in the information a principal in the transaction. All the evidence went strictly to prove that the contract for the hire of the boat was made between Oldfield and Ternan and that it was at an end before the prisoner took any part in it; the money was received from Oldfield as principal and not as the agent of any party; the boat was given up to him by the owner who did not recognize Laurie at any time in the transaction; and therefore whatever part he subsequently took in the matter even admitting that the original intention was felonious still there was no evidence to prove him to have been a principal in the case. He would therefore submit that the evidence adduced did not support the information which charged Laurie as a principal and also that the original intention to commit a felony had not been made out.  Mr. Rowe in furtherance of the argument contended that in law this was no larceny inasmuch as the privity of contract existing between the parties had not been determined at the time when the conversion if any took place. It was understood that the boat was not to be returned before 7 o'clock in the evening; she was converted if there was conversion before that period; therefore the legal possession had not reverted to the original owner and the special property of the holder was not determined. Mr. Rowe then cited several cases in support of his argument that if the time for which the boat had been lent had expired before she was converted there would then have been felony but not otherwise as the legal possession would then revert to the original owner; and every subsequent possession by the holder would be a trespass and amount to felony if a felonious intention existed in taking. He would therefore maintain that the legal possession was in the prisoner at the time of the alleged conversion as the privity of contract had not expired; that there was no new trespass and therefore in law there was no larceny.  The Attorney General contended that there was sufficient evidence of the intention to go to the Jury.  Prisoner's Counsel replied.  His Honor the Chief Justice was of opinion that the intention in conversion was a mere matter of evidence; and with respect to the boat having been delivered up to Oldfield it was for the consideration of the Jury whether under all the circumstances of the case the prisoner had not made use of Oldfield's instrumentality; he would therefore put the case to the Jury on its merits.  No witness being called for the defence His Honor proceeded to sum up the evidence and observed that with respect to the offence there should be as the information stated a felonious intent to steal take and carry away. It was clear that there was no intention to proceed with the boat on a shooting party as had been stated by Oldfield to the owner at the time of the delivery; but if it should appear that there was no original intention to convert it and a purpose of returning it however the owner might otherwise have been practised on still there was no felony. The case then turned entirely upon the original intention and the onus probandi was cast upon the prisoner. It was in proof that he had obtained the boat at all events under false pretences that he stated his intention to restore it which he afterwards did not do when requested saying that his son should proceed on the voyage. Was then his original promise to restore the boat by his son sincere or was it merely a statement to induce others to join him in procuring it? The name also was erased; Oldfield was angry as he said it was another man's boat; and Laurie only laughed. It was then for the consideration of the Jury whether taking the whole conduct of Laurie from the evening the meeting was held at his house whether his intention was at first innocent; for if his original intention was innocent and the design of converting afterwards came upon his mind there was no felony. The case was entirely for the consideration of the Jury.  The Jury retired for about half an hour and returned a verdict of Guilty. - The prisoner was remanded.  Andrew White was arraigned for the murder of Patrick Taggett on or about the 22d of February last. This charge rested almost entirely on circumstantial evidence which was gone into at some length. Mr. James Purcell chief constable was the first witness examined. He deposed that from information reaching him of Taggett's murder he proceeded with several persons most of whom were subsequently examined to rhe [sic] scene where it was rumoured the murder had been committed. It was at a stockstation called Ottoo-hill at some distance from the settlement at Bathurst and belonged to Mr. Hassall where the prisoner was employed as a shepherd and Taggett the deceased as a hut-keeper the nearest station was distant not less than six or seven miles. Here on the 26th of February Mr. Purcell arrived with several other persons and prepared to search the hut of which prisoner and deceased had been inmates. They found the unfortunate hut-keeper stretched at his length within. The body lay with the tace [sic] downwards which covered a space of blood of about two feet in diameter. There was alarge [sic] wound on the back of the head; another on the side: and three other stabs as if from a knife in the throat. A knife lay by the side of the deceased and appeared to have been instrumental in the work of blood. On searching further near the hut an axe partially covered with blood and pertions [sic] of hnman [sic] hair adhering to the back part was discovered hid under some pumpkin and potatoe [sic] vines; there was also a shovel covered with blood.. Whilst this search was carrying on prisoner shewed no willingness to assist ; he informed the chief constable that three bush-rangers were in the habit of paying friendly and frequent visits to the station and it must have been at their hands that deceased received his death blow. The night he found Tagget murdered the prisoner affirmed there was a more than usual barking from the dogs deceased besides was very subject to fits and upon prisoner going into the hut and seeing him stretched along the ground he at first imagined it might be from an attack of that kind but was soon unhappily deceived. Prisoner was desired to take off his clothes for the chief constable's inspection and on the shirt which appeared to have been but newly washed were found traces of what was at the time considered blood more particularly about the right arm. The shirt was here produced in open court and there appeared marks of what may have been blood but of a very dark colour and the axe which was also produced seemed to have rusted in the part which was sworn to by several witnesses as having been covered with portions of the dura mater mixed up with blood when first discovered. Upon prisoner being put upon his oath and reminded of the heinous crime of swearing falsely his countenance and conduct seemed to undergo no particular change. He informed Mr. Purcell that nothing more than a steel mill had been taken away from the hut.  Henry Robinson an overseer of the sheep stations to Mr. Hassall deposed next to his being present when Taggett's body was discovered had heard that the latter was subject to fits but prisoner mentioned nothing to him about dogs barking. Enoch Jones another stock-keeper was at the hut occupied by White and deceased. On the Thursday the former was within doors at an unusual hour. Jones and another partook of some provisions and left the hut for their own station prisoner remaining behind. Next morning before sunrise a bitch belonging to White came into Jones's hut and White himself followed almost immediately with information that the bushrangers had stolen a steel mill and that Tagget was dead and fit for burying. He asked the man to take charge of his sheep whilst he should be getting to the next station to inform the constabulary. Several other witnesses were examined; most of them concurred in the opinion of the deceased and prisoner having lived together on friendly terms. One said that deceased had complained of prisoner's behaviours to him. The latter attempted in his defence to prove that whilst employed with his sheep away from the hut he was aroused by the barking of dogs; and it was his suspicion then and at the present moment that bushrangers had robbed and plundered Tagget as he was frequently in the habit of boasting of his hard dollars. The learned Judge recapitulated the evidence very minutely and concluded by recommending the Jury to find the prisoner guilty provided the circumstantial evidence adduced could be thought conclusive; but if a doubt existed it was a principle of the British law that the ends of substantial justice would be better answered by letting twenty guilty persons escape than that one innocent man should perish.  After consulting about six minutes the Jury found the prisoner guilty. Sentence of death was then passed in the usual way.  Execution 1 May 1826  EXECUTION.  The execution of the ill-fated man White took place on Monday morning. He was as was mentioned in our last found guilty of one of the most horrifying offences to humanity that of murder; the murder of a hut-keeper an unfortunate being similarly situated with himself employed under the same master and living together in an isolated part of the country where the very nearest station occupied by civilised man was not less than from 6 to 7 miles. What his incentive for committing this horrid act may have been is doubtful. The deceased was said to have boasted of his having money and perhaps a desire to get possession of this may have inspired the direful crime. The evidences of White's guilt though alone supported by concurrent circumstances seem too strong to admit of uncertainty. His being the only person residing with or near the deceased--- the knife which White was in the habit of using at his meals being discovered lying by the dead body--- the shirt of the deceased being stained with blood--- and all the moveables of the hut which it is more than probable bushrangers if any such had been there as was said would have carried away altogether being found "planted" as they term it in different directions contiguous to the hut operated strongly against the prisoner. A steel mill was the only article missing and even the canvas which was used to cover this was also picked up. A certain degree of dubiety with regard to the guilt or innocence of accused persons must ever exist where nought but circumstantial evidence can be brought forward ; but the evidence adduced on trial though of this nature it might be said scarce left a "peg to hang a doubt upon."---From about seven o'clock of Monday morning the culprit was assiduously attended by the Reverend Mr. Therry and he continued to receive the consolations of religion until past nine. His father who seemed to be a very old man was present in the condemned cell and did not leave it until the executioner entered with the apparatus of death. The unfortunate man continued kneeling before a crucifix during the preparatory operation of binding the fatal rope and when all was announced to be ready he moved from the cell accompanied by the Reverend Clergyman sub-sheriff the gaoler and several other persons towards the yard at the rear of the prison. An officer's guard was drawn up fronting the drop and a number of the prisoners in irons were arranged on one side. When the culprit had got to the yard his death warrant was read by the sub-sheriff who importuned the unfortunate man now that all hope of escaping an ignominious fate had deserted him to confess his crime and not aggravate it by being hurried into another world with the consciousness of having spoken a falsehood. In this request Mr. Therry joined but could elicit nothing further than an attestation from the ill-fated being that he forgave with the utmost feeling of sincerity all who may have been accessary to his fate; he would never perhaps have been so well prepared to die as just then and that he could confess nothing further than what he already had to his clergyman in the Attorney General's presence. He then conversed with and took an affectionate leave of his father and two prisoners whom he called from among the crowd of others and gave a free vent to his tears. The clergyman continued to pray and read with the culprit who made the responses in a firm and penitent voice until it was intimated that the time for carrying the law into execution had nearly transpired White then recovered from his kneeling posture and called out again to some others of his former companions. Notwithstanding the awe and feelings of sympathy which scene of death like the present cannot but at all times excite; there was a singular mixture of sorrowful humour in the manner of the unfortunate man. On getting off his knees he stared about for a few moments then called out "Arrah Jem Father Howell and all o'ye's why don't you's all come here and speak to me?" The men he addressed himself to stepped forward and with the unfortunate father took a hasty farewell; the culprit conversed with them in Irish until he was reminded by Mr. Therry that it was then time to wean his mind from all mundane associations and fix it on his Saviour in whose presence he was shortly to appear. In about three minutes more the mortal career of this misguided young man was finally closed. He struggled but little and seemed to meet death without much apprehension.  It is rather a singular coincidence that this youth should have suffered death on the day of his birth. He had only just attained his twentieth year on Monday last the very day of execution. His body after being suspended the usual time prescribed by law was placed in its coffin and conveyed away to the hospital for dissection. This reservation of punishment applied to murderers does not appear to have that horrifying effect upon delinquents in this country as elsewhere. With the lower orders of Irish more particularly a great and universal horror of having their bodies exposed after death to the surgeon's knife predominates. Many of them view this latter part of their atonement in a darker light than death itself but here where the unfortunate criminal is most generally far removed from kindred and early associations this idea becomes fainter and where there are no friends "no women to make lamentation" he becomes indifferent as to the disposal of his body after death and is most generally consigned to the earth unlamented and unhonored.  Jonathan Leitch Master of the brig Atalanta was indicted for violently assaulting one Abraham Blaxland a seaman on board that vessel.   The indictment contained two counts - charging two separate assaults - the first committed on the 18th of Feb and another on the 18th of May last.  The defendant pleaded Not Guilty. The Attorney-General stated the case. The defendant was charged with a common assault admitted on the high seas. By the New South Wales Act jurisdiction was given to the Supreme Court of that Colony over offences like the present which might be committed at sea. The possible defence which would be made to that charge was that discipline should be kept up on board a vessel by a master among his people. It however was a question entirely resting with the Jury on the evidence which should be adduced; it was for them to decide whether the violence alleged to have been exercised by the defendant was more than commensurate with the faults of the men. If it were the defendant in law was criminal. The Master was certainly vested with some degree of power to inflict punishment; but then in the exercise thereof it must be of that nature as not to border on harshness or severity when the occasion did not require it. The present case was not one of that description - he believed that nothing approaching to a violent resistance of the Commanding Officer's orders or the least particle of insubordination had been manifested among any one of the crew. From the depositions then before him a clear case of assault appeared to have been committed without any justifiable reason for doing so whatever.  ABRAHAM BLAXLAND sworn - examined. Is a seaman belonging to the brig Atalanta. The defendant is Master of that vessel. Witness shipped at Rio de Janeiro in March last and acted in the vessel from thence till her arrival at this port in the capacity of cook. On the 18th day of the same month sometime towards evening he was employed in the ship's galley in preparing some heated water for the cuddy. Witness had occasion to leave the galley a few minutes and on his return found that the kettle had "capsized" and the contents run out - he thereupon took the boiler for the purpose of getting it re-filled with water when defendant met him and on hearing of the disaster said witness was drunk and immediately laid hold of the fore-sheet which he laid about him for some moments. Witness endeavoured to escape from defendant's fury by running over to the other side of the deck; defendant then left the rope and caught hold of a pair of iron fire tongs; with which weapon he was also repeatedly struck. Witness was much injured in the body in consequence of the violence. There were several of the crew on deck at the time. On another occasion the 8th of May defendant came into the galley and accused witness of being drunk - on being about to reply to this charge defendant knocked a knife out of witness' mouth and then took hold of a piece of iron used for the purpose of breaking coal with which he inflicted many blows on his head and other parts of the body. The iron instrument was about two feet in length and two inches in circumference. Witness cannot say how many blows he received; but knows they were "very many." He was nearly deprived of sense in consequence of their violence. Defendant swore on this occasion that he would take his (the witness's) life. Had not drank any thing in the way of spirits that day beyond the usual allowance of grog.  Cross-examined. - The first assault took place on the 18th of of [sic] March last; the second mate told him it was on that date. Does not know the day of the week. The water was spilt by accident and not occasioned by witness being drunk. He and the whole of his shipmates are under a sentence of the Bench of Sydney Magistrates to imprisonment in the goal. Witness will not trust his life again with the Captain. The master's finger bled when he knocked the knife out of witness' mouth. It was not occasioned from witness striking at the Captain with it.  John Henson deposed that he is a seaman belonging to the same vessel as last witness; saw the two assaults complained of. Witness on one of the two occasions endeavoured to get his shipmate off from being further beaten by saying "Oh Captain don't kill him." The latter left off striking the other man and levelled a blow at witness. The man was very much injured from the severe blows he received; and was incapacitated from pursuing his ordinary work but in extreme pain. Was not present at the commencement of the second assault; but saw the Captain strike prosecutor first with a rope attached to the fore sheet and afterwards with an iron bolt.  Cross-examined. - It was stated by the Captain in the course of the voyage that a greater part of two casks of wine had been drawn off in the hold of the vessel. Believes he accused the seamen of doing it. Believes it was on the two occasions that the alledged assaults took place on the robbery being discovered. Never saw any of the seamen drunk on board.  Re-examined - The defendant came to witness the day after he was assaulted and asked him to say "yes" - meaning that he witness was drunk on the previous day. Believes it was intended to be entered in the log book. Some other evidences deposed to a similar effect.  The Attorney General here closed the case for the prosecution.  In the defence Mr. JOSEPH BARBOZA was examined.  Was freighter of the Atalanta from Rio de Janeiro to this port. Was passenger in the vessel. Knows the carpenter and cook were "rope's-ended' in the course of the voyage. They made no complaints to witness of ill-treatment. Has seen the second mate drunk. The whole of the crew with the exception of the boys were shipped at Rio de Janeiro. There were two casks of wine spoiled in the hold allowing for leakage of the casks. A great quantity was embezzled. Never saw nor heard the blows which had been represented by witnesses to the Court. Never heard that any seaman was unable to do his duty in consequence of them.  Cross-examined - Never heard such a thing before as a whole ship's crew leaving a vessel altogether when prosecuting a voyage which they were bound to perform by articles. Witness chartered the Atalanta at Rio de Janeiro. There were no mariners on board. Does not know for what reason the men left the vessel. Never saw above one man drunk on the voyage. Never saw a man on board strike any one of their officers.  THOMAS HAY deposed that he is cabin boy belonging to the Atalanta - sailed from London to Rio de Janeiro and there entered into articles with the Captain - deponent during the voyage has frequently desired him to tell Mr. Barboza that the cook was drunk else he would flog him - witness did so from fear - will now swear he never once saw a man drunk on board; defendant generally used both hands and feet after he had laid about the rope's end.  Cross-examined - between 13 and 14 men sailed with the vessel from London - the whole of them with the exception of witness and another had left the vessel at Rio - it was on account of bad usage - whilst at that port witness endeavoured to go on shore with the other men to the English Consul but was prevented - one man named Alexander Murphy was drowned in escaping the vessel while swimming on shore; - on arriving at Sydney the crew determined to come on shore "to seek their rights" - the first time witness heard that the Captain made a complaint against the crew for leaving the vessel was when he called at the office of the Attorney -General.  This closed the defence.  The JUDGE summed up. - the fact of an Assault on the Cook his Honor observed was incontestibly proved - there was no single fact adduced in evidence to shew what the man had done to call for the exercise of legitimate authority - nor had there appeared ought to justify the defendant to go to such extremes as he had - the mariner had not been proved to have been either insolent or insubordinate in his conduct - and if ever he had been culpable of one or both offences the weapon that was used to administer correction was unfit for the purpose. It was very necessary that the Captain of a vessel should be invested with the power of punishing acts of insubordination - but like every other investment of authority it should be dispensed judiciously. Some circumstances had been brought to the notice of the Court relative to a quantity of wine which it appeared had been abstracted; - whether the cook was a party to the theft did not appear - and even if it did in effect it could furnish no case for the defendant unless it was proved that the man took the wine and thereby got drunk. The defence had mainly gone on the credibility of the evidence for the prosecution. It was urged in the Defence why not apply for justice at Van Diemen's Land? - that was a circumstance of very little importance - a thousand circumstances might arise either from the shortness of the ship's stay there or want of opportunity. The men reserved their application to that Court and they had made it - another circumstance however deserved much consideration which was that the persons who had given their evidence that day had been brought up from gaol on a complaint made by the Captain of a refusal on their part to proceed with the vessel to sea.  Mr. BARBOZA had stated the first time he heard of any complaint from the Captain against the men was on the Monday after they had absented themselves - why should they subject themselves to 3 months imprisonment unless they had some reason for so doing? - what answer did the men give to that query they say "we consider our lives in danger." The whole of the witnesses agreed to an assault having been committed on two several days; it was true and indeed very probable that in the recital of the assault there might have been some exaggeration[.] Mr. Barboza stated he knew nothing beyond a "rope's ending;" thinks from his situation on board the degree of violence which was represented would have come to his ears; and therefore it was only natural to infer the story had been exaggerated from a degree of bias operating on the minds of the evidences; it nevertheless did not go so far as to say that the assault was without foundation or that the alleged assault had not been committed.   The Jury after about five minutes consultation found the defendant guilty.  Tuesday.   The MASTER of the Atalanta was this day brought up for sentence. An arrest of judgment was moved on sundry objections which the Court overruled and the Chief Justice adjudged the defendant to pay a fine of 50£ to the King and be imprisoned 'til such fine was paid.  William Curtan and Thomas Ryan were indicted for the wilful murder of Joseph Jackson at Bringelly on the 31st of October last.  The Attorney General stated the case.  Mr. Hill Assistant Surgeon on the Establishment at Liverpool examined the body of the deceased on the 3d of November; it was taken out of a water-hole at some distance from the house; the bones of the face were beat to pieces and several large fractures on the upper part of the head; the wounds were sufficient to cause the death of any person; a rope was tied round the body to which was fixed a large stone.  Mr. John Horsely Coroner of the District of Bringelly held an inquest on the body of the deceased on the 3d of November last; the two prisoners came forward at the inquest and each persisted in making a declaration which witness committed to writing; the prisoners were frequently warned before they made any declaration and no promises whatever were held out to them on an inducement to confess. The witness then proceeded to read the declaration of the two prisoners each of whom accused the other as the actual perpetrator of the murder. The prisoner Curtan stated that in consequence of having been served with a summons to attend the Magistrates' Court by the deceased with whom he had some dispute he mentioned the circumstance to Ryan who told him that Jackson was certainly laid out to do him some injury if he was not prevented and that the only way to be safe was to knock out his brains and that he (Ryan) would do the deed himself for a glass of grog. The two prisoners accordingly repaired to the dwelling of the deceased the same evening; Curtan remained at the door while Ryan entered the house and after a short interval during which Curtan heard a scuffle within Ryan came forth and said "Jackson is dead." The two prisoners then dragged the body between them to a water-hole at some distance from the house and having attached to it a large stone with a rope they threw it in and then returned to the house from which they took a quantity of tobacco which was divided between them. The declaration of Ryan went to state that on the evening of the day on which the conversation took place between them as detailed by the other prisoner that Curtan came into the house of a man named Brown where they both lived about 9 o'clock looking very pale; that after having his supper they both went out to go to bed for which purpose they had to cross the yard; that on the way Curtain told Ryan that he had killed Jackson and asked him to go and help him to remove the body as it was too weighty for him to manage by himself and that he (Ryan) refused to have any thing to do with it.  Cross-examined by Mr. Keith. --- No hopes whatever were held out to the prisoners to induce them to make any confession; Ryan charged Curtan first; witness cannot say positively whether Curtan was the first that came forward but he was very urgent to make a declaration.  John Molloy examined. --- Witness is stockman on the estate of Captain Piper at Bringelly; knew the deceased and knows the prisoners; witness was passing the house of Jackson on the morning after the murder took place and saw two children belonging to the deceased crying at the door; on going into the house he saw the clothes of the deceased scattered over the floor and also some blood sprinkled about in consequence of which and the deceased being missing he informed the district constable; the prisoners lived at the house of a man named Brown about a mile from the dwelling of the deceased.  Michael McMahon constable at Bringelly apprehended the prisoners at the house of Brown; found in the bed where Curtan slept a shirt stained with blood Ryan said "thank God you can find nothing bloody in my bed;" witness handcuff'd Ryan and after some time he said he would not keep handcuffs on for any other man and that if witness would send away Curtan and Brown he would shew him something that had more blood on it; that he would shew them Curtan's clothes that were hid at the back of the barn and also where the body was in a water hole. Witness saw the clothes taken from the place where Ryan had described by another constable named Ambridge; a pair of blue trowsers brown jacket and check shirt; the body was found in a water hole to which they were conducted by Ryan about 15 rods from the house of the deceased.  Cross-examined. --- Curtan said when the clothes were found that they were lent by him to Ryan and that he had not seen them for six weeks before.  Robert Harbison clerk to Mr. Lowe the Magistrate at Bringelly was present when the prisoner was taken into custody. On the following morning Ryan seemed desirous of making some discovery and took Ambridge a constable and witness to a dung-heap at the back of the house where some clothes were found concealed. The body was afterwards found by Ryan's direction in a water-hole some distance from the house of the deceased; it appeared to witness by Ryan's manner that he knew exactly the spot where the body was thrown; they searched a number of holes as they went on; they found the body about six inches below the surface of the water but it was not removed till the following day when the Coroner attended. The deceased had been two or three days before to Mr. Lowe to take out a summons against Curtain for taking away; or harbouring his wife without his consent; a hoe-handle was found in the house of the deceased with an appearance of blood and hair upon it.  Michael McGlynn was present at Browne's house when the constables apprehended the prisoners; Curtan was handcuffed first; when the constables came in witness saw Ryan leave the house go to the stable and take out some clothes which he shook and then proceeded towards the straw-yard where he remained a short time and then returned to the house; the clothes were found afterwards in the yard near the place where he had seen Ryan go to.  The prisoners being called on for their defence severally denied the charge and Ryan stated that if he had been admitted King's evidence he would have brought the whole matter to light.  George Brown called as a witness for Ryan deposed that Ryan and Curtan lived in his house; that Ryan was at home on the night when the deceased was supposed to be murdered; that Curtan on leaving the house early in the evening asked Ryan to accompany him which he refused; that he remained within and supped with witness and his family; about two hours after Curtan returned and took his supper and Ryan and he then went out together to go to bed; they then slept in the stable. Witness saw no more of them till next day; has heard people talk of Curtan and Mrs. Jackson frequently; the deceased himself has complained to witness of Curtan.  A witness was called on the part of Curtan to prove an alibi but failed.  The Chief Justice summed up the evidence. The information against the prisoners contained two counts the first count charging the murder as committed by Thomas Ryan and then went on to charge Curtan as present aiding and abetting. The second count reversed the relation and charged Wm. Curtan as giving the blow and Ryan as present aiding and assisting. The case turned partly upon the confession of the two prisoners made before the Coroner and partly upon circumstances.  It was distinctly disclaimed on the part of Ryan in his declaration that he knew any thing of the transaction except from Curtan after the deed was done. It appeared also that after he was taken into custody he made certain disclosures; that he asked the constables to take the handcuffs off and said that he would not suffer for another man and that if the shackles were taken off he would shew where the clothes were. It was stated that upon searching the sleeping place of Curtan that a shirt was found stained with blood and that Ryan said "thank God you can't find any bloody clothes on me" and on the following morning the conversation took place with the constable that if the handcuffs were taken off he would shew where the clothes were. Then with his knowledge of that fact how came he to conceal it from the constable on the night before? The conclusion certainly was against him. It was also stated by McGlinn that on the night before after Curtan was taken into custody he observed Ryan go to the stable take some clothes out and proceed to the stable yard and on the following morning the clothes were found within a yard of the spot where he was so seen; and therefore supposing they were the clothes of Curtan or any other person who commited [sic] the murder how came he to conceal them unless he was somehow mixed up in the transaction? He must have known at all events that Jackson had been killed though it by no means followed that he was the person who actually slew the deceased or even that he was present aiding and assisting but that he was at all events in possession of the fact of the death and though not guilty of the charge laid in the indictment as a principal either in the first or second degree he still might be guilty of concealing the murder. The question then was was the murder done in the interval between Curtan's leaving Browne's house and returning? It might have been committed in that time and Ryan not be a principal either in the first or second degree. Considering therefore that circumstance it would be for the Jury to give the prisoner the benefit of any doubt which they might entertain. The case against Ryan was that he knew of the murder and did not make the disclosure in the way an honest man would have done. With regard to the case of William Curtan he like Ryan was found in the situation where the clothes were found stained with blood; there was also found in his bed a shirt stained with blood which had not been in any way by him accounted for. The clothes also which were found though pointed out by Ryan still they were identified as like those which Curtan wore. He related before the Coroner after having been previously warned that being served with a summons to answer a complaint of the deceased that he mentioned it to Ryan who said if Curtan did not take care Jackson would send him to Port Macquarie. A conversation then ensued between them in which Ryan said the only way by which Curtan would be safe was by knocking out the brains of the deceased and that he would do it himself for a glass of grog. In pursuance of that purpose they repaired together to the house of the deceased Curtan stated that he remained outside while Ryan went in and that in about 25 minutes he returned saying "Jackson is dead" that they then dragged him out and having fastened a stone to the body threw into a water-hole. The declaration then of Curtan though he stated the deed as having been done by Ryan was not evidence against Ryan but was as far as it went evidence against himself. It proved even according to his own account of the transaction that he was present aiding and assisting for in the eye of the law being present did not mean being present so that he could actually see the deed perpetrated for he might be on the watch or in some other way at hand so as to aid if necessary as it appeared even from his own confession coupled with other circumstances of suspicion there could be no doubt of his being a principal in the second degree.  The Jury returned a verdict Curtan Guilty. --- Ryan Not Guilty.  Laura Ann Short was indicted for stealing a gold ring value 10s a gold brooch value 10s and another brooch value 5s the goods and chattels of Daniel Whitehead.  A second count laid the property to be that of Ann Whitehead.   The prisoner pleaded Not Guilty; and as a matter of courtesy by the Court permission was given that she might be accommodated with a seat.  ANN WHITEHEAD sworn; - examined by Dr. Wardell on behalf of the prosecution. Knows the prisoner L. Ann Short; they were at one time on terms of intimacy together. Prisoner was in the habit of visiting at witness's house very frequently. She has sometimes come to her house four and five times in a day. Prisoner made a visit on the 30th of January last - it was for the purpose of writing a letter for witness to send to England; it was about 11 o'clock in the forenoon when she came. Witness procured a sheet of paper and prisoner began to write the letter. A good deal of conversation ensued on various subjects; and whilst prisoner was about to conclude the letter which she had written two men came into the room where witness and prisoner were sitting. One of the two persons a man named Samuel Cooley tapped prisoner on the shoulder[] and enquired if she was writing "a love letter." Prisoner made some reply and the two individuals left the room A few minutes after a person named Spicer passed by the house. Witness observed him look hard in at the window and then turn round as if with an intention to come in. Prisoner observed his approach likewise and exclaimed "Oh! he is coming." She immediately ran into the bedroom to avoid being seen by Spicer. The latter came into the room where witness was sitting and remained there about a quarter of an hour; he then went away. During his stay he asked three or four times why Mrs. Short had run away. After Spicer had gone the prisoner came from the bed-room. Supposes she went away about one o'clock as her husband used to come home at that hour to dinner. About three o'clock in the same afternoon witness went into the bed-room to work; and at length got up from her seat with an intention of going to her box to put on her ring. - Witness usually kept her trinkets in a small paper box which was deposited in a large box and was kept in this room. On opening it she found the small box had been taken out and her wedding ring together with two brooches which it contained were gone. There is but one apartment in the house that is used as a bed-room; it was in this room that prisoner had gone to hide herself from the view of Spicer. Witness on discovering her loss went out of the room; and seeing a servant man in the passage named Phillip Riley asked him if he had seen any thing of the brooch or ring; he declared not; and on being told that these articles had disappeared from the box declared it must have been an impossibility for him to go into witness' bed room without being observed by her; as having to pass through the parlour where witness and M[r]s. Short had been employed in writing. Witness hereupon felt satisfied that he was not the thief; and for that day dropped the subject. Witness informed Mrs. Short the next day of the mysterious disappearance of the articles.; [sic] the latter replied "it was very strange how any body could take them" and remarked that she had not raised the latch of the door during her stay with witness on different subjects who at length went away. Prisoner called on witness very frequently after this occurrence. She repeatedly asked if witness had made anything out respecting her loss. Witness as frequently expressed surprise how the things could have been lost as herself and witness were the only persons who could have had an opportunity of removing them. Prisoner then remarked that she was extremely lucky in finding little things and had no doubt but she might "light" on them some time or other - this happened on the second or third day after the robbery. Witness on every subsequent visit that prisoner made at her house continually enquired if she had been successful; prisoner said she had not then but desired witness to "keep her hopes alive" Prisoner hereupon became the object of her suspicions as being the thief and hope to "delude" her to return the ring and brooch. On the Thursday week following prisoner made another visit. She came in great haste addressed witness with "good morning[]' and said "I have been in great agitation this last half-hour to see you. I want to know what kind of a brooch it is that you have lost" -- producing one which witness immediately identified on examination to be her property. Witness asked prisoner where she got it from. She replied "well now I am happy I have got it for you; I am sure it is yours." She said I went out with an intention of going to my father's when I met Captain Piper who said "what makes you wear such a dirty bonnet?" when I replied "that I was unable to raise a dollar to have it cleaned;" he then gave me a dollar. I was going along directly afterwards when a barrack man came up to me and said "young woman do you want to buy a brooch?" I said yes if it is worth the money you ask for it; he said that he should have 6s. for it; he observed that he had given a dollar for it. But as I refused to give more than what he had given for it the man sold it to be for 5s. which I gave him and took the broach [sic] with me the man representing he had bought the broach of a woman. Witness after hearing this relation asked if any person was present when she made the purchase; she replied there was no one in particular whom she could mention but that several persons were passing at the time. Witness expressed surprise that she should have bought any thing from a barrack man. Prisoner then said if she had only had her servant Duffy present it would have been all she would have required. Witness then told her something awkward might arise from it; to this she made no reply. Prisoner then left witness the broach [sic] and went away previous to which she expressed a hope of being able to hear some tidings of the ring also; said her husband (Dr. Short) had a ring on his finger and perhaps it would turn out to be her's (the witness's) as he had found it; witness asked her when Dr. Short had found it; prisoner replied it was about five or six weeks ago ; witness said then it was impossible it should be her ring having lost it since that time. Prisoner remarked in the course of conversation that the Doctor (meaning her husband) had said her luck in finding things would at some time or other involve her in trouble she however promised to look at the ring. Prisoner called on her again the next day said she had told her husband of the circumstance about the broach [sic] who said she had one very wrong; he remonstrated with her saying it might bring him to be "hanged;" she on that occasion too remarked that it was her belief the ring her husband wore was witness's. Prisoner came in on the next day (Saturday) witness spoke to her very warmly on that occasion; witness said to her "why not bring the ring as you think it is mine?" the prisoner replied she would ask Dr. Short about it and at the same time observed if it was not her ring as it was Saturday and the barrack men out she would endeavour to find out the man of whom she purchased the broach [sic] and it was possible she might get some tidings of it; a few minutes only had elapsed after going away when she returned in company with her husband; the latter and prisoner stood at the gate and called witness out of the house. Dr. Short told her he had a ring which he supposed might belong to witness he said it was found in Elizabeth-street; it was of a similar description to that which prisoner had given of it. He said he had not had it beyond three or four weeks; he left witness the ring; swears the ring he pulled off his finger and left with witness was the ring which was stolen and is her property. There was a scratch in the inner edge of the ring near the stamp; it was a gold wedding ring. No person could have gone into the bed-room on the occasion alluded to but prisoner without witness's knowledge.  By the Court - Saw the brooch and ring about one hour before prisoner entered the house. Had occasion to go to the box where these articles were deposited and then missed them. The brooch brought by the prisoner will swear to be the same as was lost. Is equally sure as to the identity of the ring. They are both witness's property - Prisoner was present with her husband when the ring was returned. The property was here produced.  Cross-examined by Mr. Rowe for the prisoner - A servant called Phillip was present at the conversation between witness and prisoner. Did not say on examination at the Police Office that the brooch had been lost on the day of a christening in one Kid's family. The servant Phillip was at home on that day in charge of the house. - On Sunday evening witness having returned blamed the man for taking some bread. Did not charge him on the day of the christening with stealing the brooch or ring. Witness had them then in her own possession. Was usually in the habit of going to the box five and six times in the day. Never said to any person she could not tell who had taken the brooch or ring as many persons had access to the bed-room. Never said so to Thos. Kid's wife- A woman named Dowden came out to this Colony in the same ship as witness did. The brooch was returned on Thursday week following to its being missed and the ring on the ensuing Saturday. They were then in the same state as when stolen. Witness bears no grudge towards prisoner or her husband. Brought this brooch with her from England. Had another brooch on coming out. - Again means that she lost the ring on the 30th of January. Never uttered any revengeful expressions towards prisoner or her husband. Never said she would spend the last farthing she could get in prosecuting Mrs. Short. Seldom goes to the house of Mrs. Clarkson in Hunter-street - Knows no one called by the name of William White in the Colony. Never said anything to him or any other person respecting this prosecution. Once had a servant named Mary Cole. She was once an acquaintance of witness. - They are not so intimate together as formerly. They might have been brought before the Police together. Witness was never there beyond once. Was sent to the Factory because witness could not prevent going; but has since returned and is in the presence of the Court. Will not say she was sent to that place innocently or otherwise.  Re-examined by Dr. Wardell - Prisoner was perfectly well aware that witness was sent to the Factory. Notwithstanding this she was in the habit of intimacy with her and of coming to her house almost every hour in the day.  PHILLIP RILEY corroborated the statement of Mrs. Whitehead.  THOMAS SPICER corroborated the evidence given by the two preceding witnesses as to his going into prosecutrix house for the purpose of speaking to Mrs. Short on some business.  SAMUEL COOLING deposed to a similar effect.  This was the case for the prosecution.  For the defence  MR. S. TERRY deposed to being present at the Police Office on the day that the business now before the Court was under investigation. Remembers prosecutrix stating that she went out on a Sabbath-day to take tea or to a christening cannot say which it was. She was repeatedly asked if she missed the articles on the Saturday or Sunday; prosecutrix replied on Monday the 30th instant. She swore to having made no charge against "Phillip" a servant of stealing the articles on the Sunday. The man servant was afterwards called who swore quite opposite; he deposed that it was on the Monday night on the return of his mistress home that she blamed him for stealing the articles; witness means the brooch and ring.  Cross-examined; It was said by the witness (Phillip) that it was on the Monday she enquired of him who had been in the house during the mistress's absence. The examination of this man took up a considerable time. He appeared a good deal confused; thinks he was bothered. The man gave his evidence pretty well until he came to be cross-examined and then he became bewildered. Cannot say whether he confused the accusation of stealing bread with that of stealing the trinkets.  By the Court - The servant gave different testimony to that of his mistress.  Cross-examination continued; as far as recollection serves believes Mrs. Whitehead deposed she had not accused the servant of purloining the ring and brooch. The articles being found in prisoner's possession was accounted for in this way. The ring was found in the street by one Duffy and prisoner. The broach [sic] was said to have been bought by prisoner of a barrack man for 5s.; considers it was from Duffey's evidence that got Mrs. Short committed.  Mr. MICHAEL ROBINSON spoke to nearly the same effect as the above witness; has no recollection of a christening being mentioned there. Cannot charge his memory with any accusation being made of stealing the articles against any other person than Mrs. Short. Evidence in corroboration of Mrs. Whitehead's statement was called and added his belief that the testimony of Phillip Riley was so flatly contradictory that it was deemed by the Bench inadmissable and they would not receive it.  Mr. THOMAS AMSDEN understood from the servant man's evidence that his mistress had accused him of stealing them on the previous day (Sunday).  Cross-examined. - Understood that Mrs. Short had bought the broach [sic] and Duffy found the ring.  Mr. J.T. CAMPBELL J.P. examined. - There was a considerable discrepancy between the evidence of Mrs. W. and her servant; his evidence being so contrary at one part and on [th]e other of the examination it was discredited.  Cross-examined. - Remembers that witness at one time said he was accused of stealing bread and at an other time of stealing jewels and between the two charges he grew confused; and his evidence was in consequence rejected.  Dr. HALLORAN deposed that some time during the last Christmas vacation he saw a ring on Dr. Short's finger who remarked he had been "re-married." Witness did not examine it.  THOMAS KID. Knows prosecutrix. Remembers her stating to him the loss of her articles. She stated that several persons had admission to the bed-room. Said there were two or three who went in and out and among others was Mrs. Short. Said she could not tell whom to blame for the business. A young woman named "Cole" was sewing in her house on the day the articles were missed.  JOE RAPHAEL was at the Police Office on the commitment of Mrs. Short. Remembers the examination of Mrs. Whitehead. She said something about a christening. The servant swore that on Mistress' return from the christening on the Sunday she challenged him with stealing the ring and brooch. A few minutes afterwards Dr. Wardell examined him and he then said he believed his Mistress did not miss the articles before the Monday (the next day). Cannot say whether Mrs. W. said she went out to a christening or a party "at pleasure." Knows the subject was "chewed" over a good deal.  Cross-examined. The servant recollected himself on re-examination. Knows nothing about christenings or ladies parties of evening pleasures. Always stays at home. Never heard anything about a christian (Loud laughter). Witness "I meant christening."  THOMAS OWEN examined. Is clerk in the office of Mr. Rowe. Remembers seeing Dr. Short wear a ring in the early part of January.  Wm. WHITE sworn. Resides at Mrs. Clarkson's in Hunter-street. Knows both Mr. and Mrs. Whitehead - they are now in Court. Has frequently called her by name. Has had conversation with her about business before the Court. She knows witness by name very well. Advised her to give up the prosecution. Said she would spend the last farthing before she would give it up. She appeared in a passion and spoke in a revengeful manner. She was formerly a servant to Mrs. Reibey. Knows nothing against her general character.  Cross-examined. Did not want to compound felony. Witness undertook the task of advising with the prosecutrix on his own head.  Mrs. WHITEHEAD. On Friday last a woman named "Cooley" said in witness's presence that her husband had lent "Whitehead" £15 to prosecute Mrs. Short. This reached Dr. Halloran's ears; and in consequence a subpoena was issued for my attendance.  Mr. BRUCE. Heard the woman alluded to say that her husband had advanced £5 to Counsel at the Police Office and £10 to further the prosecution in that Court.  DUFFEY was now called. Has been nearly three years' in the service of Mr. Short. Knows Mistress to have had in her possession a brooch. Remembers one Thursday after returning home from the market and breakfast being over in the parlour he complained to Mistress that there was no bread. She hereupon gave him a dollar to go and get some. They both happened to be going out together at the instant; but one went by the back door and the other at the front. He however saw Mistress standing at "Hill's" corner. She was talking to some man. Saw him give her a brooch; and she gave him in return a dollar. It was a round rim brooch; there was a stone in the middle of it and some little stones (The brooch sworn to by prosecutrix was here handed to witness). Will not swear positively it is the same brooch as Mistress bought. Mistress had also a wedding ring in her possession. She and witness were walking together in Elizabeth-street when she suddenly stopped and pointed out a ring to witness which was then lying on the ground. Witness took it up rubbed the dirt off and gave it to her. Will not swear it was a wedding ring. Mistress gave it to her husband. He said "Dn it why it looks like a wedding ring." Never saw Master with a ring on finger before that time in his life.  The defence here closed. The learned Judge then summed up the evidence at great length. Verdict - Guilty.  The Chief Justice. Gentlemen this is an information presented by the Acting Attorney General against the defendant Robert Howe Editor and Proprietor of the Sydney Gazette for a libellous attack contained in that Journal of the 14th instant on the character of Saxe Bannister Esq. in his office as Attorney General of the Colony. Mr. Bannister now an Advocate of this Court but lately holding the high office of Attorney General opened the case and I must say it was painful to me to hear him take so enlarged a review of public events connected with this Colony as he thought proper to do and the more painful as the nature of the prosecution did not require that latitude. Mr. Bannister however as a private Barrister thought himself at liberty to take the range he did and I would not interpose though as I have already said it was painful to me to hear those observations on the Government which he deemed it necessary to make; as he should have recollected there were other persons connected with and who held offices under Government who though they happened to differ in opinion with him were it is to be supposed influenced by motives equally pure as those which he assumed and who had not an opportunity of vindicating themselves. I have thought it necessary to make these preliminary remarks in order to prevent such a course of proceeding being drawn into a precedent and serving as an example for future irregularities. The charge resolves itself into one of a very simple nature namely whether the publication in question is as it it [sic] is alleged to be injurious to Mr. Bannister in his office as Attorney General of this Colony. I state to you gentlemen that any writing having a tendency to degrade a man in society or to blacken his character is a libel but that a libel against a public officer is visited with greater severity inasmuch as it is in fact an attack on that Government of which he forms a part. It is however the right of the public to discuss the acts of a public officer provided it be conducted within the legitimate bounds of fair discussion; but if on the contrary it degenerate so as to impute bad motives and wicked conduct it is then no longer fair it is libellous. Laying down these remarks as applicable to the matter before us I now proceed to examine the particular parts of the paper which has been put in evidence; but before I commence those observations which I may find it necessary to offer I think it but fair to read the whole of the article through; for though particular passages have only been laid in the information it is still the right of the defendant to have the entire read and therefore instead of giving it piecemeal I will read the whole through and then proceed to offer my remarks on those passages which are laid as libellous. [His Honor then read the entire of the article from the Gazette of the 14th instant and continued.] A portion of this writing has been selected as the grounds of the present prosecution and as you gentlemen may not be in the habit of seeing instruments of this nature I will explain to you that in informations for libel it is usual to apply to each passage what is called an inuendo setting forth the meaning which the party who conceives himself libelled believes they bear and it is for you to see whether that construction so put upon them is in your opinion correct. The information is divided into two counts; the first count extracts a larger portion of the article as libellous; the second count refers only to one particular part. It charges that the defendant Robert Howe devising and intending to asperse and defame Sax Bannister Esq. did publish certain defamatory matters of and concerning the said Sax and which are contained in the words and figures following that is to say "An Attorney General not that we would have any gentleman act contrary to his own political principles should never allow any party or faction so to operate upon his mind and give a bias to his views which would tend to effect a disunion between the immediate members of the government which it is so desirable should ever harmonize as a well-tuned instrument however diversified might be its strings" The sense put upon this passage is meaning thereby that the said Sax Bannister had allowed some person to put a bias on his mind so as to create a disunion between the members of the Government. But gentlemen does this passage bear the meaning which by inuendo is given it? Do you consider it meant that the Attorney General did allow such a bias to be put upon his mind? The charge is taken from the first part which states that an Attorney General should not do certain things and the inference put on it is that Mr. Bannister had! Now I must own I do not think the passage will bear that construction. The writer then goes on to observe on various abstract propositions and sums up all in these words "thus it will appear in our humble opinion that an Attorney General should be a good lawyer if an orator so much the better - a lover of virtue and religion - an enemy to every species of vice - a stickler for justice - a friend of humanity - an enemy to oppression - and the staunch and most steady prop of the administration." This is the sum of what in the writer's opinion should be the general qualifications of an Attorney General and would it then be just to say it was therefore meant that the late Attorney General was not all this? Gentlemen I do not think it fair to put such a construction on it. It is an abstract view as I take it --- a hypothetical position of what an Attorney General should be. The writer says the Attorney General should be the Governor's lawyer and also states how according to his notions he should act; but I do not think therefore that the natural inference should arise that Mr. Bannister did not do all this. Such a construction would be quite irreconcilable with the latter part of the same article in which the writer pays so many handsome compliments to Mr. Bannister for his amiable and upright conduct in public and in private life. I must own I cannot think myself that the passage bears this construction; but you gentlemen are the judges and while I state to you my general impression if you should be of opinion that the meaning put upon this paragraph is correct and that the writer in pointing out the qualifications which an Attorney General should have meant to insinuate that Mr. Bannister wanted these qualificasions [sic] if it appears to you that the praises which are subsequently bestowed are ironical are insincere though I must say that throughout the whole of the article in pointing out the abstract qualifications of an Attorney General it would be unfair to suppose it to be therefore meant that the late Attorney General failed in those qualifications but still if it should be your opinion that such was the meaning the writer intended to convey then the passage is libellous. With respect to bias that charge may be perfectly innocent. It is a common expression to say that a man acts under a bias under influence. If however an officer in a public situation suffers a bias to take possession of his mind it is no doubt highly discreditable to him and therefore criminal to charge him with it. But then the question is whether it was wilful and I leave it to you gentlemen to say whether in your opinion the meaning put upon it is the true one. I am of opinion however that it was not intended to be distinctly charged that he did so wilfully; for in another passage it is stated to have been unconscious and certainly if it were unconscious on his part it was not criminal in a public writer to say so. We now pass on to the next alleged libellous passage which charges that "Where parties find that a Governor is impenetrable to other than open and fair representation their movements will obviously incline towards his legal adviser and if the Attorney General should be so unfortunate as not to have his eyes wide open and to possess too much credulity the inevitable result will be that anarchy and dissension will creep in to the injury of good will and good government and it will be ten to one in the event of the Governor being a firm and inflexibly just Ruler that the Attorney General sooner or later becomes the victim of that party who may have sacrificed him either to their disappointed ambition or because such political schemes could not be brought to bear which would tend to the pecuniary injury of all - themselves excepted." Now I can hardly call this a conveyance of a charge even if it were so which the law considers libellous. Is it libellous to charge a man with credulity? Certainly not. It may not be true it may be his weakness it may be misfortune. If it were insinuated that the credulity ascribed is voluntary is wilful the case would be otherwise but with respect to the mere charge itself I do not think it libellous and I have therefore no hesitation in disposing of this part of the question altogether. "We have already observed that we would not suggest that an Attorney General should meanly crouch to the dictates of any Governor supposing those dictates should be contrary to British law and of course dissonant with his own views; but whilst this concession is tendered we must observe it is only the duty of our Attorney General to advise it being the Governor's province to rule which brings us to the declaration that an Attorney General even however high in rank and legally constituted his mind still it is his duty or else why does he take the office to forego the expression of private feeling so that the Governor act not contrary to law and with a view to the ends of public justice: An Attorney General therefore by adhering to this line of conduct would avoid many quicksands and shoals  The Jury left the box for about five minutes and returned with a Verdict of --- Not Guilty.  This was an action for libel.   The plaintiff it appeared was Master of the Sydney Free Grammar School and it was certain letters written by defendant impeaching the plaintiff's integrity that constituted the present grounds of action. One of these letters the first count included and tended evidently to harass and oppress the plaintiff as projector of the Grammar School. It appeared in the Sydney Gazette of Nov. 28 1825 and was signed "Fidelitas."  Here the letter was read.  The second count tending to vilify plaintiff comprised a letter published in the Sydney Gazette of December 8 1825 bearing the defendant's signature and was addressed to the Editor. To these defendant pleaded the general issue; and secondly justification on letters purporting to come from Jacob Josephson with whom plaintiff was once on terms of intimacy and under obligations to but from a subsequent disagreement their mutual dealings became the subject of public disquisition and defendant considered in such case the article subscribed "Fidelitas" justifiable and that plaintiff was not unanimously elected head master there being 30 governors and only 14 present at his election.  Dr. Halloran it was stated to the Court had resided for many years in the Colony and had been employed in the education of youth. One of the causes of the present action originated in a letter published in the Sydney Gazette of November 28 subscribed "Fidelitas" and it was contended that no person who had read that letter could avoid discovering its grossness its tendency to vilify the plaintiff and to sink him in the estimation of his neighbours and of the world in general. Defendant in justification set up a plea that plaintiff's situation laid him open to criticism; but was it criticism to prevent an individual from gaining his livelihood? was it criticism to throw him into general disrepute? The plaintiff was elected head master by a full committee of the trustees and it was maintained that private pique alone had actuated the defendant in penning his letters signed "Fidelitas" and E.S. Hall; and the assessors would feel themselves bound to give conscientious damages.  Mr. R. HOWE - Knows the author of "Fidelitas" and letter subscribed E.S. Hall. Has reason to think the manuscripts have been destroyed but not since receipt of subpoena. The reason for destroying those papers was because he (witness) wished not to retain any memento of plaintiff. Thinks Mr. E.S. Hall to be the author who transmitted them for publication. The second letter was received on the 8th December when witness communicated with Dr. Halloran. Witness in his conversations with the defendant did not consider him to have been actuated in his letters by any particularly vindictive motives towards plaintiff - their mutual dislikes were pretty well balanced. Witness thought at first that plaintiff was the originator of the Free Grammar School but afterward saw reason to attribute it to Mr. John MacArthur. Is a trustee and believes that a number of young gentlemen are under the head master's care.  Examined by Mr. Wentworth - Is sorry to have known plaintiff. Thinks him quite unfit for moral instruction and that he has libelled witness and many others for some years past. Received letters from plaintiff. One witness considered too foul for insertion. Thinks the words villain and masked assassin applied in plaintiff's correspondence to defendant and were in witness's opinion and in the opinion of a clerical friend more abusive than argumentative.  Witness would feel delicate in bearing testimony to plaintiff's general conduct as he was himself implicated wiith [sic] him in certain pending prosecutions. Considers plaintiff to be a general libeller the libel commencing with "Bob Howe a vastly ugly babe of grace" was written by the plaintiff. Count O'Candle witness considered a horrible production. The babe of grace was made the subject of a charge of felony in April 1822; but plaintiff was unanimously acquitted. He was subsequently destined to stand his trial for the libel; but no prosecutor appearing was dismissed; and this for no other reason according to witness's opinion but because be (Mr. Howe) declined appearing against plaintiff. Never heard plaintiff make use of obscene language; and does not consider him unfit for head master from a want of literary acquirements but of m[o]rality.  Witness became a trustee and gave his assent to Dr Halloran's election to the post of head master: because as he said it might assist plaintiff's family; and indeed plaintiff was so old and looked so unwell that witness could not avoid thinking he might not live long. He (witness) did write a letter of condolence to Dr. Halloran. Is grateful for any sort of information even though it be libellous. Did court plaintiff's acquaintance. The letter was in a complimentary strain; and implied that a certain eulogy on the plaintiff coming from a certain individual could not meet with publicity; but concluded in those words nearly; "but still the poor Doctor's (meaning Dr. Parmeter) attempts deserve credit seeing that they are bestowed on one who deserves so much at the hands of the Colony;" and concludes with "grateful esteem" &c. Is of the opinion that plaintiff deserves praise for originating the plan of a free grammar school ; but witness never for his part entertained any personal respect for Dr. Halloran - the latter did write an article in defence of witness against Mr. F. E. Forbes; but it was not made use of. Was much shocked on hearing plaintiff one day use the word God not properly. Mr. Hall's son is not in the Institution. He did go to Dr. Halloran's school some time since. After "the babe of grace made its appearance" Mr. Hall removed his son from the school. Was sued by plaintiff for the full quarter's amount which the plaintiff gained; and witness joined in the judgment against Mr. Hall.  MR. GEORGE ALLEN - Is secretary to the Committee of the Free Grammar School of which Dr. Halloran is head master - 14 trustees including witness were present at the election; none of the members were allowed to vote by proxy. Thinks that plaintiff is entitled to thanks for the service he did to the community in projecting the plan of a Free Grammar School. Witness was authorised to act for Mr. Howe by proxy. In the head master's election it was expressly concluded on that all but twenty of his scholars were to be given up. Witness thinks that the birth and appearance to the world of the "ugly babe of grace" induced Mr. Hall to remove his son from Dr. Halloran's seminary. - Has conferred with defendant on letter signed Fidelitas which witness himself never read but it was read to him as a friend and in his professional capacity. (Here witness wished to take the sense of the Court on the propriety of his answering as to whether Fidelitas could be considered libellous witness being one of the defendant's legal advisers. The question was waived.) Knew but little of Dr. H. and that little not discreditable before witness became a trustee to which office he was unknowingly appointed. Has heard reports prejudical [sic] to the plaintiff; which if true would unfit him for being head master but is not in the habit of condemning on hearsay evidence and particularly on reports circulated in the Colony which are very frequently unfounded. Dr. H. in speaking of Count O'candle said but for one verse he would have no objection to be considered the author. Can't say that there would be more subscribers if there were another master. Witness is a member of the Wesleyan Society and upon hearing that plaintiff's scholars were in the habit of swearing he mentioned it to plaintiff who challenged investigation of his scholastic discipline and treated the matter otherwise in a very becoming manner. Witness has no recollection of having read a work entitled Castigator[] has heard plaintiff's reason for assuming the appellation of Dr. Gregory it was in order to elude the officers of justice who were in quest of him for an alleged libel contained in a letter against Mr. Canning. Witness was not spoken to by any person about an attack on Mr. Crawford principal clerk in the Colonial Secretary's office. Considers that plaintiff in his school checked rather than encouraged immorality. There was an investigation by the school Committee into the conduct of the head and under master. As no charge had been brought against the former he was of course continued and no charges could be sufficiently substantiated against the latter upon minute enquiry. Early foibles witness considered should not ever after operate against any individual - even being the author of such an article as the far-famed "babe of grace" `should not unfit a man for society after a two-years' probation. The trustees deemed it expedient to restrain the head master from interfering in any political controversy; and not alone on account of fidelitas but because it was understood that plaintiff intended becoming the editor of a newspaper. A special committee met to investigate certain alleged derelictions on the part of the under master; and several young gentlemen were examined but nothing could be brought against him. The under master a few days after resigned of his own accord.  Mr. SIMEON LORD- Is a merchant and has known plaintiff ever since his arrival in 1819. His children have been educated by plaintiff who in witness's estimation is better calculated for such a task than any other person in the Colony. Considers that plaintiff's greatest fault is over-irritability; and that unless roused by injury no one can be more harmless. Witness was of opinion that Mr Howe did not speak correctly when he attributed his not appearing to prosecute as the cause of plaintiff not paying a compulsory visit to Port Macquarie; as with one exception all the Magistrates were in favour of the plaintiff.  Mr. SAMUEL TERRY coincided in Mr. Lord's favorable opinion of the plaintiff as an instructor of youth and the injurious tendency of Fidelitas. Thinks if the latter was subscribed by the d-v-l it would be a d-v-l-sh production - but still considers that the writer's motives were not personal. It was the witness and Mr. Pitman who brought about the recovery of a box which had been left in plaintiff's custody the 19th of October 1825 by Mr. Jacob Josephson. A letter was upon this addressed to plaintiff apprising him of the circumstance of a box containing some valuables being placed in plaintiff's hands by Josephson for the purpose of defrauding his creditors. Will not swear that the letter was not suggested by plaintiff. Josephson's goods were not at the time advertised. Witness strongly approved of plaintiff's giving up the box.  Messrs. WILSHIRE and CHISHOLM entertained a high opinion of plaintiff's abilities as a teacher of youth and affirmed that if any immorality practised in the school had come within their knowledge they would have removed their sons immediately nor would they have become trustees.  Mr. RICHARD DRIVER was a pupil of Dr. Halloran's for three years and during that time never knew the plaintiff knowingly to let any immoralities be practised. (Here the plaintiff's case closed.)  Mr. Wentworth spoke for the defence. Before entering into the merits of the present case he would wish to lay down something of the law of libel; truth may be considered a libel in a criminal information but could not be so held in the present case where the person complaining holds a public situation of trust and consequently subjects his conduct to the public scrutiny. The learned Gentleman proceeded in proof of his positions to quote from several law authorities; commentators on parliamentary discussions are protected by the law; so are critiques on books of an immoral or dangerous tendency or on person committing breaches of trust which latter clause was prima facie in defendant's favor and where parties are in the habit of libelling each other. The malus animus in such cases according to Lord Kenyon alone constituted libel and in this the learned Counsel was positive the present case was entirely deficient. Mr. Wentworth went on to affirm that the individual who stepped forward to expose the immoralities of any publication or gross breach of trust would deserve praise for purging literature of a vitiated taste and would confer a benefit on society. A large show of ridicule had been attempted to be thrown on the length of plaintiff's pleas of justification entered on the report they were styled pleas of surplusage but Mr. W. was prepared to prove them all. After some comments on the plaintiff's conduct as connected with certain transactions between Josephson and his Creditors the following witnesses were called:  Mr. Jacob Josephson was first examined. He stated himself to have been once intimate with the plaintiff. (The witness requested he might be allowed to unfold his own history as connected with the plaintiff.) - Nearly two years since it might be recollected the witness was robbed or said to have been robbed of some thousand dollars in consequence he was forced to compound with his creditors who all subscribed to a deed in which they consented to receive their monies by instalments at certain periods. Witness upon this paid down a principal part of the debt but subsequently acknowledged having got back all or the better part of his dollars. Some of his creditors supposing that the loss of the dollars was all a fabrication filed a bill in equity against the witness's property while others declined cancelling their former deed of argument still consenting to be paid the debt by instalments. In this emergency the witness went on to affirm that he consulted plaintiff whom he had frequently assisted and who always acknowledged it and adopted his advice of secreting a portion of jewellery not through felonious motives but for the benefit of those creditors who had not joined in the bill of equity. On the 6th of October a box containing valuables was deposited with the plaintiff's consent in his bed-room; and on the 19th of the same month witness stated himself to have been surprised by the appearance of plaintiff who came into his house trembling and holding out a letter which plaintiff said he had just received. It bore the signature of Messrs. Terry and Pitman and intimated unequivocally that a box belonging to the witness had been seen going into plaintiff's house and requesting that it should be rendered up to his creditors. Plaintiff did not deny that such a box was in his house and that it should be surrendered as it subsequently was to the Under Sheriff Mr. James. It was plaintiff gave information of the box having been left with him and who edited the letter requiring it to be given up. Witness had lately received a letter from the Attorney General requesting to know whether he (witness) felt himself guilty of any thing which might entitle the Attorney General to file a bill against him. Witness sent back an answer that he was no lawyer himself and could not tell (a laugh.) Considered Plaintiff a very proper instructor of youth.  Mr. Macleod's examination followed next. - He knew plaintiff on his first arrival in the Colony and at that time and for some time after received much kind attention from him for which Mr. M. still felt grateful. He had seen the production termed Count O'Candle it is a description of a wedding and bedding; the latter is the most objectionable part. Witness thinks plaintiff has put him down as the author of certain scurrilous letters reflecting on plaintiff. "He calls me Cudgel" said the Witness but he is mistaken.   Mr. Cape who is a schoolmaster stated himself to be much annoyed by plaintiff's sons throwing stones at his doors and styling him a cornuted monster or cuckold which Mr. Cape knew to be totally false. Plaintiff's daughter acknowledged having once flung a huge peach stone at the witness's door. Witness's son is candidate for the under master-ship but neither the latter nor witness himself look to be head masters; does not know that plaintiff was at the time aware of his son's conduct. After some further disquisition Messrs. Carter and Cooper were examined.  Mr. Hutchinson refused to mount the witness box as he had received no subpoena to enforce attendance he was then merely a visitor in the Court; but whilst the dispute was pending Mr. H. walked out wishing the Court good evening.  The Learned Judge entered into an explanation of the law of libel and concluded by expressing his opinion that the plaintiff was entitled to some trifling damages.   The assessors after some deliberation found a verdict for the plaintiff Damages one shilling without costs.  A TRUE Narrative of BLOODY MUTINY on board the CHILI Brig INDEFATIGABLE.  Sydney 24 September 1828.  We hasten to present the following account of this disastrous mutiny in the dress in which it came under our view. The Chilean Brig Indefatigable was lately the English Brig Calder formerly commanded by Captain Peter Dillon and was on its way to this Colony with a cargo of wheat.  The Indefatigable was laden with 2500 fanages of wheat 60 fanages of walnuts and donkies. She was owned by Mr James Duncan of Valparaiso and the captain as well as the cargo except for a small portion that belonged to Mr Loffgreen the chief mate.  She sailed from Conception the 11th of June but being under Chili colours it was not known if she would be admitted into this port; accordingly it was resolved as the mainmast was sprung and fished to enter as in distress to endeavour to obtain liberty to sell as much at first as would serve for the vessel's expenses and ultimately if possible to dispose of the remainder; then to copper her and return to the coast of Chili direct.  On the 21st of July she had made her latitude about 17.5 degrees South and longitude 129 degrees West. Here follows the declaration of William Todd second mate who with three of the crew were forced into an open boat and exposed to an uncertain navigation of above one thousand miles.  "I William Todd Englishman late second mate of the brig Indefatigable depose to the following: - "On Monday the 21st of July my watch was from eight to twelve at night when over I was relieved by the chief mate and went below to my cabin turned in and fell asleep; was awakened by a great noise as of something falling down the companion hatchway opposite to which was my cabin on the larboard side; heard Mr Loffgreen sing out "Oh! Oh! Oh !" and heard myself called by him; tried to get out of my cabin but found it fastened on the outside; forced it open when the steward put a sword in my hand; coming out trod on the body of the captain who was lying with his head in the after cabin.  "Stepped over him and went into the after cabin where by the help of a lamp that was nearly out saw a pistol lying on the desk; took it up and Mr Loffgreen who had jumped down the cabin skylight called to me to fire; I cocked it but suppose it was not loaded as it did not go off.  "I was immediately seized by three men who took me into the steerage and lashed my two elbows together; when there Mr Loffgreen desired me to beg for his life thinking they were about to murder him which I did to Angelia one of the chief of the mutineers and a man who belonged to my watch.  "They then took me on deck as well as Jouel (steward) whom they bound and lashed both of us to the ring-bolts on the larboard side of the quarter-deck; they then brought up the mate with his hands lashed before him and placed him on the starboard side of the quarter-deck; he begged them to let him go below again which they did and he was allowed to go to his bed; Angela dressed a wound in his right arm which he had received and they left Antonio one of the mutineers sentry over him.  "About an hour before daylight three of the mutineers hauled the body of the captain on deck dragged it forward to the larboard gangway and threw it overboard saying in Spanish 'Heave the donkey overboard to make food for fishes etc.  "Just before daylight they went forward and brought Jose (an elderly Spaniard who had been confined below with the rest of the people in the forecastle) on deck and made him take the helm threatening him if he did not they would serve him out too; four of the mutineers walked the quarter-deck till daylight when one of them relieved the man Jose from the helm and the others took him forward as he could speak English to order the watch below (who had all been hastened down below in the forecastle) on deck and they were put down the fore-hatchway and confined in irons viz the cook carpenter Peter (a Swede) and the steward whom they removed from the quarter-deck and barred the hatch down.  "They then brought the chief mate up and took him forward as far as the fore-hatchway but appeared undetermined what to do as he came aft with them again and was placed below as before with a sentry over him; they now came and asked me to navigate the ship for them but I said I could not and they then cast me adrift and put me in irons with the others down the fore-hatchway; they gave us something to eat and nailed the hatch down; heard them firing pistols and buzzing all day long.  "About 11 a.m. four of them came below armed with pistols cutlasses knives etc and took the cook out of irons; and brought us something more to eat and 3 bottles of water securing the hatch again; heard a sentry walking all the following night close to the fore-hatchway who sung out regularly 'All's well' and during the night they kept up a continued succession of shouting and hallooing. [118]  "Wednesday morning about 8 o'clock three of them came down dressed in the captain's clothes gave us something to eat and took blocks and lines on deck and secured the hatch; the same three men returned soon after to get up a water cask but they were all leaky and they returned on deck without; we soon heard them hoisting away at what we supposed was the longboat after which three of them came down and took me out of irons conducted me on deck with pistols pointed at me and allowed the mate to come up to the top of the companion ladder who told me they had obliged him on the pain of death to navigate them; they then made me get into the boat and one of the mutineers who was in the boat came out and stood at the gangway with his arm in a sling and was ordered to inform me there was everything necessary in the boat to go to the Society isles and that I was to persevere and reach them.  "The other three men were brought up one by one in the same manner and forced into the boat; when all in they let go the painter but while dropping astern one of the mutineers (Angelia) came aft and threw me a bundle of fishhooks at the same time shedding tears; one of them then stood up on the taffrel held up the Chili flag and they all sung out 'Viva el Rey'.  "We found in the boat all our chests and clothes masts sails two bags of bread one cask of water four pieces of beef in a bucket half a cheese some bottles of aquardiente two gun cartridges of powder three muskets one marlinespike a skein of twine a saucepan fire-wood and a cut pork barrel full of sand to make a fire in tarpaulin compass and the mate had been allowed to give me a sextent and chart on the back of which he had written the following: - "'My sincere friend - I am not allowed to speak to you much less to write to you. Let me only here tell you my intentions in this present cruel situation. The murderers have obliged me to navigate them with pistols before my face - where to I don't know but I believe Manilla. I will try to retake the vessel as soon as an opportunity happens and then meet with you in Otaheite. Should you have an opportunity when you are let out do it as I have secretly Jose and the cook on my side to assist you. I am trembling while I am writing this to you my dear brother as I fear it would be discovered. J.W.L.  (Have patience and trust to God only).  "We experienced favourable weather till on the 7th of August we made Resolution Island and procured water and cocoa nuts there of a native who showed us a Missionary's book and behaved very kind to us; on the 9th made Tuscan Island then Birnie's afterwards Adventture Island where we were forced by a strong southerly s breeze which broke our rudder and gudgeon sprung the mast and broke the compass and kept us continually wet and baling; on the 15th made Chain Island where the natives hauled the boat up and gave us refreshments in exchange for a musket. "We started the next day and arrived at Tahiti on Monday the 18th when we were surrounded by 2 or 300 natives armed with muskets who made us prisoners thinking we were a crew of runaway convicts who a short time since had arrived among the islands in a small schooner which they had lost and had broken open the house of the chief of Huaheine had taken the muskets and a barrel of powder therefrom and helping themselves to one of the Missionaries' whale-boats some of them had left the island but were pursued by a boat with natives four of whom the villains shot and it was with difficulty the others reached the land.  "To my joy at daylight saw the Tiger which ship we knew having left her in the port of Conception and Captain Richards in the course of the forenoon convinced the Queen she was mistaken and we were freed immediately from all restraint. By the Tiger we were conveyed to Sydney."  Peter Erikson native of Swedish Finland seaman also gave evidence as follows: - "That after being asleep he heard a great noise on deck but thought it was the captain only striking the man who was looking out and he fell asleep again; wanted to pumpship but could not get up on deck as the hatchway was fastened."  Jowel native of Bengal and steward of the brig also. deposed thus: - "About four o'clock on Tuesday morning got up and was going on deck; when nearly up the ladder saw the mate running forward and two men running after him with swords; he was crying at the same time for help; I at this instant received a blow with a barrel of a musket across my eyebrow and another with a cutlass across my collar bone and fell down the hatchway crying out; when the captain roused out and asked what was the matter; I told him 'I don't know Sir somebody cut me and I am full of blood.'  "He went back into the cabin got a pistol and was going up the ladder when he received a blow with a musket barrel across the skull and one across the throat with a knife or cutlass and tumbled down into the steerage when one man jumped down with a piece of firewood and battered him about the head till he was dead."  SCENE I  (Macquarie Harbour. The shore of Sarah Island an extensive marine basin girdled by lofty wood-clad mountains. PRISONERS dressed in yellow and black mostly without shoes or stockings many in irons cross-cutting sawing and shaping timbers for a vessel which is being built.  Appropriate music as the curtain rises. BRADY MacCABE and BIRD in front. REX a convict overseer watching. He throws a malignant leer at BRADY who retorts with a scowl of defiance. REX regards him significantly and walks away. BRADY drops his axe and sits with his arms on his knees and his head buried in his palms.)  MAC: So downcast Brady? You are marked for mischief.  BRADY: Ay. The thankless slave who for a smile from power would sell his soul - that such a wretch should wield the destiny over men like us!  MAC: A fruitful source of evil - a fertile source of crime when convict is empowered to drive to madness his fellow convict. Marked you his smile of mischief?  BRADY: I marked it and defied it.  MAC: And yet his wiles may reach you.  BRADY: And if they do 'tis but my fit reward that spared him from the claws of the eagle and the maw of the crow. [2]  MAC: I do not understand you.  BRADY: As willing guide to the party dispatched in pursuit of me and my luckless associates of my recent flight unequal to the perils and privations of the dreadful route we led them this Rex this miscreant must have whitened with his bones the barren strand of Port Davey had not my lustier shoulders sustained his pack my brawnier arm upheld his fainting frame and my scanty scrip afforded a famished crust.  BIRD: Would you had buttered the crust with arsenic! Hang me if the herring-faced lubber ain't scheming to feed the cats on us.  BRADY: Let him do his worst; for here my time is brief.  MAC: What mean you?  BRADY: To compass liberty or welcome death.  MAC: A dream - a dream.  BRADY: Not so Mac. No dream to men as desperate as I.  MAC: What! Have you forgot that but two runaways have ever reached the peopled territory - and then only to find their way to the scaffold?  If you have forgotten this have your own sufferings escaped your memory?  BRADY: No MacCabe no. With six despairing followers and with a three days' scanty ration we plunged into the mazes of Glow-Worm Forest a jungle whose primeval solitudes the sun never yet illumined  MAC: And wilt thou again encounter horrors such as this?  BRADY: Look around you. What are we here? Helpless. Heartless. Hopeless. Despair our demon.  Death our only friend.  BIRD: Too true! Too true! Lucifer's must be an awful billet if it equals this. [3]  BRADY: Look at yon wretches struggling with the waters. Mark them and ponder our condition. At sunrise in garments drenched with the watery labour of the previous day we are dragged forth to toil starved. What food we get the worst and scantiest. Not one of earth's fruits save bread the weavily refuse of prison ships. The salt dead horse engenders scurvy - constant exposure to wet begets ague. Remonstrance is denounced as insubordination and the lash is our relentless doom.  BIRD: The triangle and the cat.  BRADY: Is punishment apportioned to offence? No! A deserter is berthed with a murderer. An educated forger shares the bunk with an abandoned cracksman. This this is the felon's life. Is it marvellous then that our deaths should be consummated in madness vengeance and despair?  MAC: You look on the horrid side of the picture Brady.  BRADY: Perhaps so MacCabe for I have sat for its worst of portraits. One day I may tell you my unparalleled story that is if you share my intended flight and we reach the inhabited country.  MAC: But without food or arms or chart or compass how can we hope to pierce the trackless wastes or how escape these death-dealing jungles?  BRADY: With slavery behind and liberty before to urge us on we shall not hesitate. I have profited by experience and have conceived an all but certain mode of escape; but were my first step from hence to death - to a torturing death - I would not stay to bear my anguish here.  BIRD: No peril no prize. We have before been daring and come what may I will be daring still.  BRADY: Be dauntless and despair not. [4]  BIRD: Rate Tom Bird as one of your ship's company. But avast! Here comes the commandant.  (They resume work. Enter CAPTAIN JAMES ORDERLY and REX. COMMANDANT inspects the men and approaches BRADY.)  COMMANDANT: Overseer take a couple of hands to the moulding loft and attend to the Master Shipwright's instructions.  REX: Very good sir. Here you Brady and you MacCabe  COMMANDANT: No insolence sir; I will not permit an insult to your fellows. Bird do you and MacCabe go. You are better acquainted with such matters.  (Exeunt REX BIRD MacCABE and ORDERLY.)  Well Brady. Are you resolved to be eternally in hot water? You know well that I have granted you all the indulgence in my power.  BRADY: Sir felon though I be I can gratefully distinguish between the man and the Commandant. You were ever merciful to me.  COMMANDANT: Then why do you abuse my good nature by pointless vexatious and insane attempts to escape?  BRADY: I confess my fruitless endeavours but ah sir were you in my unhappy condition I am sure you would have done as I have.  COMMANDANT: When I detached you up the river as an act of kindness to the Lime Burner's Station you contrived an escape in a fragile canoe which by a miracle was not your coffin. Is this wise? Is it well?  BRADY: Gracious sir I have but one answer. It is for liberty I seek - for liberty - for which I must strive or die.  COMMANDANT: You are mad. You have found it of impossible attainment. Ponder the past and beware the future. (Exit the COMMANDANT) [5]  LADY: He is kind and merciful; but he cannot feel the convict's woes.  (Enter BIRD and MacCABE.)  BIRD: And now Brady disclose your plan of escape.  BRADY: Tempt not the jungles. We must escape by sea.  BIRD: But how?  BRADY: See you yonder whale boat?  BIRD: Ay better never swum.  BRADY: The brig is anchored near to Gummet Isle. At her stern floats this boat. In a crevice I have from time to time secreted oars besides a fishing line. The nights are dark; there are no sentries on the isle. With this line I will swim to the boat cut her painter and you can quietly haul her to the shore. We can then embark together. The shoal water will prevent the brig from following. No other boat can touch this 'Blue-eyed Maid'. With hearts resolved ere morning dawns liberty shall be ours. What say you Mac?  MAC: The project is a feasible one.  BRADY: We have blankets enough for canvas. Round Wellington Head and we'll be away.  BIRD: No more shilly shally. When shall we start?  BRADY: This night or never.  BIRD: The hour?  BRADY: Midnight.  BIRD: Agreed.  (A bugle call. Muskets are fired - off. While BRADY is speaking REX enters calling 'Muster!')  BRADY: Sunset. The brig has hauled her ensign 160 down. The boats make for the shore; and see the different gangs are mustering. [6] Let us be seeming busy; and my friends forget not midnight.  (REX looks malignantly at BRADY. Exeunt.) CURTAIN  SCENE II  (A romantic Tasmanian glen. The background is occupied with towering precipices clothed with gum and other forest trees. In the foreground which is a beautiful undulating plain the mimosa is in full bloom. Enter MRS BROADHEAD DOLLY JEMMY and PEGGY.)  PEGGY: Now do Aunty be after puttin' the best leg foremost. It's at home we soon shall be.  DOLLY: Home cousin? I think it be from home we be goin' furder and furder every step.  JEMMY: Dang it Dol thee be'est one o' Job's comforters. Now doan't 'ee be downhearted? Ma; we honly gotten more nor two miles now afore we git to our own grant o' land.  MRS BROADHEAD: Two mile! You might as well say two thousand. Lord Jemmy my dear I'll never be able to reach it. I be clean done.  PEGGY: Och Aunty jewil take a sup of this. It's the real thing an'll put fresh spirits into yez.  (Gives a bottle to MRS BROADHEAD who drinks) How is it with you now? I declare you look better already. I thought that it'd cheer the cockles of your old heart it would.  JEMMY: Oh! ... Oh! ... Oooh!  MRS BROADHEAD: What be the matter Jemmy dear?  Jemmy: Cramp i' the stomach. Mulligrubs. Oh! Oh! ... Peggy some o' your drops ... quick! quick! [7]  (PEGGY gives JEMMY the bottle and he drinks.)  PEGGY: Och Jemmy darlin' don't be after lavin' me a poor forlorn widdy afore it's married we are. Are you any asier now honey?  JEMMY: (faintly) Rather better. (Drinks) Yes - a good deal easier. (Drinks) Oh it's the cordial Balm of Gilead. What I calls Paddy's genuine Elixir. I only want some fresh salve to make me quite well.  PEGGY: What salve jewil?  JEMMY: Lip salve Peggy. (He kisses her.)  DOLLY: For shame Jemmy.  JEMMY: Now doan't 'ee be envious Dol. If thee behave thyself I'll get thee Eumarrah the King o' the Blacks for a husband.  DOLLY: King o' the Blacks indeed thank 'ee for nothing. I'll tell thee what - I prefers a sodger hociffer. But come Ma do 'ee try to crawl home.  MRS BROADHEAD: Oh dear! Oh dear! How shall I ever be able?  Jemmy: I'll tell 'ee what Ma sit down a bit an' the cart 'ull soon overtake us.  MRS BROADHEAD: Cart! Lord a mercy Jemmy dear you knock the breath clean out o' my body. Noa noa that cart has nearly been the death o' me already an' never more will I put foot in it. [8] If we mun go gie me you arm dear an' I'll hobble on the best way I can.  PEGGY: That's right Aunty. An' whin once you've got over this fatague an' we're fairly settled at the Shannon - och blessins on th' beautiful name o' it for isn't it my own dear country it minds me of- whew! Isn't it ourselves that'll be as merry as eels in a frying pan.  JEMMY: You be a brave lass Peggy an' deserve ...  PEGGY: Well Jemmy!  JEMMY: More than I can tell thee just now. But come Ma here's my arm. Pluck up your heart. Step out and defy - Black Natives Bushrangers - Rocky Roads - an' Bullock Carts.  (Exeunt supporting MRS BROADHEAD.)  CURTAIN  SCENE III  (Macquarie Harbour. Midnight. Music: BRADY enters cautiously beckons and is followed by the other PRISONERS. While they are speaking REX enters stealthily and unobserved.)  BRADY: Are we unwatched MacCabe?  MAC: We are. The lynx eye of Rex for once is overpowered.  BRADY: Then must no time be lost. Follow - and if liberty be dear be silent.  (Exeunt BRADY and the other PRISONERS.)  REX: When was I ever out in my reckoning? Said I not this morning Rex my boy there's mischief about. Was I wrong? No no no. If they can scheme I can dodge. What devil's game have they afoot I wonder? Shall I fire my pistol or watch them closer? No no be still good tell-tale till I snare them in my web. [9] Ha ha ha! So you thought to catch the old fox napping; but he is awake vermin awake to double on you all. What back already? Good barrel by your leave.  (Music: REX hides behind barrel. The PRISONERS return dragging a rope which gradually lands the whole boat with BRADY on board who jumps ashore.)  BRADY: Thus fortune smiles approvingly on our efforts. We must not dally now. Aboard with our scanty store of food; and here here for the willing oars. (He goes behind barrel and exclaims.) A spy. Betrayed! (Returns dragging forward REX.) And is it thou mine enemy? (He evinces deep but suppressed passion. REX attempts to draw his pistol. BRADY eyes him fiercely.) Strike but its flint and had you fifty lives you die. (Wrenches the pistol from his grasp.)  MAC: Justice! Justice! Pate has yielded the Tormentor to his Victims. The Hangman has sought his doom. Drag him to death.  Death of the Bushranger bold JACK DONAHOE.  SYDNEY Tuesday September 7 1830.  At one o'clock yesterday Major Smeathman and a jury held an inquest at the Fox and Hounds Castlereaghstreet on the body of John Donahoe a prisoner of the Crown by the Ann and Amelia. Having proceeded to view the body at the General Hospital upon their return the following evidence was gone into.  Michael Gorman said: I am a constable to Major Antill of Stone-quarry Creek and hold a Ticket-of-Leave. On the afternoon of the 1st instant I was on duty in the neighbourhood of Bringelly about a mile and a-half from Mr Lowe's. There were two constables and six of the mounted police in company with me and we had been in the bush for the fortnight previous in search of Donahoe Walmsley and Webber.  About o'clock our sentry saw a person whom he took for Mr Farley the Chief Constable who had gone for provisions. We thereupon got up and perceived at a considerable distance (I suppose a mile and a half) three men and a horse which appeared to have a pack-saddle upon it. This horse was black and as Mr Fancy's horse was grey we knew it could not be him. The sergeant then ordered us to pursue. The bushrangers were at this time near the bank of a creek and to avoid losing them if they crossed we separated the sergeant and two men proceeded along the left side while myself and others went cautiously to the right. This was on Mr Wentworth's farm. We got to within a hundred yards of them unperceived when suddenly espying us they made preparations for defence and Donahoe exclaimed "Come on you cowardly rascals we are ready if there's a dozen of you The bushrangers then got each behind a tree and a conversation of some length ensued about fighting.  After a lapse of nearly half an hour one of the policemen fired his shot knocking the bark from the tree behind which Webber was situated. I now levelled my piece which went off at the same moment with those discharged by two of the robbers. In about another minute one of the soldiers named Muckleston fired and I instantly saw the man now stated to be Donahoe fall. We pursued the others and after going a considerable pace in consequence of the night coming on were compelled to give over the pursuit.  John Muckleston corroborated the testimony of the last witness and stated further that the bushrangers were in a hollow surrounded by bush by which means they were prevented from observing our approach. When Donahoe saw us he took his hat off waved it three times threw it in the air and bid us defiance in the language made use of by the last witness.  Wm. Hodson sworn - I am a sergeant of the 57th and attached to the mounted police. I was out in the neighbourhood of Bringelly on the 1st instant under orders from Mr M'Arthur and Mr M'Allister to scour the bush thoroughly and remain out till I brought in Donahoe Waimsicy and Webber who from previous information were known to be in that direction. The latter two were known to me and Dr Gibson stated that he knew the other to be Donahoe who was described as a native of Dublin 23 years of age five feet four inches in height brown freckled complexion flaxen hair blue eyes and has a scar under the left nostril. When we returned to Donahoe he was in his last agonies. One ball had entered his neck and the other his forehead Private Muckleston having loaded his with a carbine ball and a pistol ball. I kept the body where we were for the night and brought it to Liverpool and then to Sydney last Saturday together with the property found on the pack-horse. The witness here produced a watch several deeds grants of land and transfers together with some female wearing apparel about 150 lbs of flour and some meat. The papers were all identified as the property of a person named Begley residing at Prospect from whom they were stolen about a week before. The jury after consulting about five minutes returned the verdict of - Justifiable homicide.  Thus is the Colony rid of one of the most dangerous spirits that ever infested it and happy would it be were those of like disposition to take warning by bold Jack Donahoe's awful fate.  Wilkinson v. Lamb.  This was an action on the case. The declaration averred that the defendant conspiring and intending to defraud the plaintiff to whom the defendant's brother was indebted in a large sum of money to wit in the sum of £194 2s. 3d. by certain false and fraudulent assertions caused the plaintiff to forego legal proceedings for the recovery of the same and to refer the case to arbitration thereby gaining time for the defendant's brother and affording him an opportunity of making away with his property whereby the said plaintiff is likely to lose his debt &c. The damages were laid at £700.  Mr. KEITH opened the pleadings.  Mr. WENTWORTH stated the case to the Jury:- They had heard from the learned gentleman who preceded him that this was an action on the case for damages sustained by the plaintiff in consequence of the false and fraudulent assertions of the defendant. The action was one of novelty and before he proceeded to detail the facts he would briefly advert to the law in reference to a case like this. The declaration charged the defendant with having made a false assertion with a fraudulent view by means whereof the plaintiff had been prevented from prosecuting a legal claim against the brother of the defendant and was induced to send the case to arbitration receiving a note at six months for the amount of the award; before the expiration of which time the maker had become insolvent and the plaintiff's claim rendered of no avail. To support an action of this nature it was necessary that there should be a false and fraudulent assertion by the defendant and damage accruing to the plaintiff in consequence. The jury however would be told that the fraud which was an ingredient in a case like the present was not that kind of fraud which was vulgularly called so. It would be sufficient if it were made to appear that the defendant's assertion was false and that he knew it. With these observations he should proceed to detail the facts of the case as they would appear in evidence. Some time in the year 1828 the plaintiff being about to go to England leased a farm at Hunter's River to the brother of the defendant at a rent of a £100 a-year. On his return to the colony nearly two years after finding that only £30 or £40 had been paid out of the rent during the period of his absence and that the circumstances of his tenant were in a declining condition he resolved to disstrain and authorised a levy to be made on the goods on the farm. When these circumstances came to the knowledge of the defendant he set a friend to work to write a half-menacing half-conciliatory letter which was succeeded by one from the defendant himself containing among other matters a denunciation of the rascally lawyers; stating that arbitration was the only proper way to settle the differences between the plaintiff and the defendant's brother; and concluding with an allusion to certain powers in the hands of the defendant and of Captain Bunn to enforce some claims on the plaintiff made by a Captain Harvey which he was threatened should be immediately put in force if he proceeded against the defendant's brother or refused to refer their differences to arbitration. Here then said the learned counsel was a direct menace if the plaintiff did not consent to arbitrate a claim for rent - not a complicated matter of account but a specific agreement about which there could be no dispute and which it was therefore ridiculous to arbitrate - that certain powers of attorney in the hands of the defendant and of Captain Bunn should be immediately put in force against the plaintiff. These were the threats and this the system of intimidation practised against the plaintiff to prevent him from prosecuting a just claim. Captain Bunn however would be put into the box and would tell the jury not only that he never authorised the defendant to make use of his name in the manner in which it had been made use of by him but that even had he been asked he never would have lent himself to such a proceeding. This therefore was a false assertion by the defendant and consequently in law was fraudulent he having known it to be false at the time. The damage sustained by the plaintiff was the result of these false representations. The arbitrators to whom the matters in dispute were referred allowed the brother of the defendant six months to discharge the amount of the award taking his promissory note payable at the expiration of that period. In the interim he became insolvent; and the sum of money which had the plaintiff prosecuted those measures which he commenced for its recovery would then have been in his pocket became in all probability lost to him for ever. The learned counsel was really at a loss to know what possible defence could be set up against such an action. But even if it should be held - that the law of the case was against the plaintiff still he felt satisfied that no one who heard the facts as they would be detailed in evidence but must be satisfied that owing to the conduct of the defendant the plaintiff had been defrauded of a sum of money which he could ill afford to lose. Under all the circumstances of the case he contended that the plaintiff was entitled to heavy damages at the hands of the Jury.  The following witnesses were then called on the part of the plaintiff:-  Abraham Hunter examined by Mr. KEITH. - I reside at Maitland and am a clerk; I know the plaintiff in this case; I know Mr. James Thomas Lamb; in Jan. 1830 he resided on a farm of the plaintiff's; about that time I was employed by the plaintiff to distrain Mr. J. T. Lamb's goods for the sum of £100 for rent due; there was a stack or two of wheat and some cattle on the farm there were also some horses more than one or two; I did not distrain for the plaintiff seemed rather delicate about it and expected that the debt would be paid; it was some time in the month of January 1830 when I was employed to distrain but I cannot tell the date; I saw three or four hundred bushels of wheat on the farm; wheat at that time sold for five shillings a bushel at Hunter's River; the cattle were worth about £3 a piece; I do not know how many there were.  Cross-examined by Mr. NORTON. - I think the wheat if sold would have fetched £60 at Maitland; the cattle would have fetched £3 a-head at that time; they would not sell for so much now.  Re-examined. - The property I saw on the farm and I did not go into the house would have sold for £140; I am sure it would have more than satisfied the distress.  Edward Ryan examined by Mr. WENTWORTH. - In January 1830 I lived at Maitland in the employ of Mr. James Lamb; there was a good deal of property on the farm then consisting of grain upwards of 100 head of cattle and 14 or 15 horses 10 or 11 of the cattle belonged to Mr. James Lamb and 3 of the horses the rest to the plaintiff; there was also some furniture; I am sure Mr. Lamb's property was worth more than £100; it remained there till Mr. Lamb went away and the plaintiff came in; Mr. Lamb took his own property away with him.  By the Court - I can't say the month in which Mr. Lamb went away.  - Dunn examined by Mr. KEITH - I know the plaintiff and am slightly acquainted with Mr. James Lamb; I was appointed an arbitrator between the plaintiff and Mr. James Lamb the defendant's brother in August 1820; Mr. McLeod was the other arbitrator; our award was upwards of £100.  Dr. WARDELL - The award will speak for itself.  Mr. WENTWORTH. - I contend that we are entitled to that naked fact without encumbering the case with a volume of documentory evidence. I only want from the witness the naked fact that there was a deed and upon that deed that a something was done namely a note given.  The learned Judge ruled that the witness might be asked whether there was an award and whether upon such award a note was given but nothing farther. The award being a written instrument should either be produced or evidence given of its loss.  Examination continued. - In consequence of the award a promissory note was given; I can't say whether this is it as it did not pass through my hands; there was a note given to that amount; I think on recollection that the note was sent to me by Mr. McLeod but I won't be positive.  Cross-examined by Doctor WARDELL - This note is dated 1st September 1830 and not payable on demand but in six months; I gave Mr. Lamb six months' credit; I was appointed an arbitrator by the plaintiff and after hearing the merits of the case on both sides I agreed to take a note at six months in consequence of Mr. Lamb's circumstances; the plaintiff was a bachelor and Mr. Lamb had a large family; plaintiff's claim was not simply for rent there were a variety of items which amounted to about £400; Mr. James Lamb objected to several of them; I did not know that Mr. Lamb had made a tender to plaintiff to nearly the amount of the award; I have never heard so from the plaintiff.  Re-examined - When I consented to give Mr. James Lamb credit I had no reason to think that I put the debt in jeopardy; Mr. McLeod the other arbitrator assured me on his honour that the debt would be paid if time were given; the chief part of the amount was for rent and a small sum of interest from the time the rent became due till the award was made.  By Dr. WARDELL - My impression is that the interest was from the time Mr. Lamb left the farm till the award was made and not for the six months the note had to run; I made no memorandum of the transaction; I thought the matter was ended then.  George Bunn Esquire examined by Mr. KEITH - I know the defendant in this action Mr. John Lamb; I know his handwriting; I believe these letters to be in his handwriting; one is dated 18th June 1830; the other the 20th of the same month.  (Letters read.)  Cross-examined by Doctor WARDELL - I remember the plaintiff meeting me in the street one day reading to me a passage in one of the letters and asking me if I had said so; I told him I could not positively say I had not but I did not think I would do as [...].  James Norton Esquire examined by Mr. KEITH - I know Mr. James Thomas Lamb the brother of defendant; I was present in Court when the defendant's brother was declared insolvent; I hold in my hand the rule of Court by which he was declared insolvent; it is dated the 19th of July last; I was his attorney in cause.  William Mitchell examined by Mr. KEITH - I am clerk to my brother Mr. Francis Mitchell of Sydney; I presented this note at the Bank of Australia for payment on the 1st of March 1831; it is dated 1st of September 1830; I was informed at the Bank when I presented it that the maker Mr. James Thomas Lamb had no account there; the endorsement on the back of the note is in the plaintiff's handwriting.  It was here admitted that on the 2d of November 1830 the sum of £195 2s. 5d in the Bank of Australia was transferred from the account of Mr. James Thomas Lamb to that of Lamb Buchanan and Co of which firm the defendant is one.  This was the plaintiff's case.  Dr. WARDELL in addressing the Jury on behalf of the defendant said the case had terminated on the other side just as he had anticipated; and he was satisfied as the Jury remembering one of the concluding sentences in the statement of the plaintiff's Counsel must have anticipated also. That this action was not brought with the bona fide intention of recovering a sum of money due to the plaintiff but with a feeling if the plaintiff did not recover that no one doubt the poor man had been defrauded of a sum of money which he was ill able to spare but which he had no legal means of recovering no one could question. The case was trumped up for that purpose and to throw around the defendant a degree of suspicion not one atom of which could attach to him on account of the part he took between the parties. That no such suspicion could attaeh [sic] appeared not only from the testimony of Mr. Bunn but even from those portions of letters which had been read and which by some strange obliquity of understanding had been laid hold of by the other side as the foundation of the present action. No person could have heard those letters read without feeling that the part taken by the defendant was the only part which a kind and affectionate relative could have acted throughout the whole of this transaction and not as it had been endeavoured to be shown on the other side the emanation of a mind contemplating some sinister design against the plaintiff for the benefit of the defendant's brother. It had been insinuated because a sum of money part of the funds of the defendant's brother had been placed to the credit of the firm of Lamb Buchanan & Co three months after the award of the arbitrators that the arbitration had been recommended with a sinister design: - that is that the defendant could have foreseen that Mr. McLeod would have induced Mr. Dunn to give six months time; that he would thereby have been enabled to lay hold of that sum of money for the benefit of the firm - and therefore those letters had been written. He (Dr. W.) however should be able to prove that the sum of money alluded to was appropriated to discharge the debts of the defendant's brother and that no part whatever of it was appropriated to the benefit of the defendant. It would also be proved that before the arbitration took place a sum was tendered by the defendant's brother to the plaintiff nearly equal to the subsequent award; and it would then be for the Jury to say whether the advice given by the defendant in the letters alluded to was not only the best advice that could be given under the circumstances of this case but the best under any circumstances. He could not conceive how such a case could have been brought before a jury - before any twelve men of common sense. What! to seek to visit on the head of an unoffending man who had only interfered for the sake of peace that acts of arbitrators! Upon the law of the case however even independently of the facts the Jury must decide in favour of the defendant; because in order to sustain an action of this nature it must be made to appear that at the time of writing those letters which had been so much relied upon there was an intention to defraud. Even if the assertions of the defendant had been false if they were not made with the design of injuring cheating or deceiving the plaintiff but with the better design of settling family differences what became of the case? The tort complained of was a false affirmation made with intent to deceive. How had that intent been proved? In an action like this fraud and damage must be proved - fraud on the part of the defendant and damage accruing to the plaintiff in consequence of that fraud. But what were the circumstances of this case? The plaintiff voluntarily placed himself in the hands of arbitrators with both of whom the defendant must have been in collusion to bring about the accomplishment of his design if any such design there was. He (Dr. Wardell) would not enter into the facts of the cased had not the defendant courted the fullest investigation into all the circumstances. Contrary therefore as it was to his own judgment and solely in compliance with the most positive instructions he would proceed to call one or two witnesses after hearing whose testimony he was satisfied that the Jury not only upon the law of the case as it would no doubt be laid down to them by the Court but also upon the facts must return a verdict for the defendant.  Mr. Frederick Carberry examined by Mr. NORTON - I am clerk to Lamb Buchanan and Co.; I know that a sum of £195 2s. 3d. was transferred from the account of James Lamb in the Bank of Australia to the account of Lamb Buchanan and Co. in Nov. 1830; I know that that money was part of a sum of £200 borrowed by Mr. James Lamb from Dr. Bowman; the amount was placed in the books of the firm to the credit of Mr. James Lamb who drew against it at various times to the full amount for supplies and to pay his creditors principally to pay his creditors; Mr. James Lamb was at that time indebted to Mr. John Lamb in the sum of £200 no part of which was discharged out of that money or has been in any way paid up to this time.  Cross-examined by Mr. WENTWORTH - I do not know the motive of drawing that sum from the bank except for convenience; it is more convenient for a settler to draw on a merchant than on a bank; he may want supplies for his farm with which a bank cannot furnish him.  E. J. Keith Esq. examined by Dr. WARDELL - I present in Court when Mr. James Lamb was examined touching his alleged insolvency and put several questions to him; I have no recollection of any remarks being made on the case by the presiding Judge as I had left the Court after my examination of the insolvent.  James Norton Esq examined by Dr. WARDELL - I was present when Mr. James Lamb was examined touching his alleged insolvency; Mr. Justice Dowling who presided seemed perfectly satisfied with the answers; he said it was a bona fide case of insolvency and one which originated in events over which the insolvent could have had no controul.  Mr. WENTWORTH replied.  The learned Judge in summing up the evidence stated it as his opinion that none of the allegations in the declaration imputing false and fraudulent assertions to the defendant had been made out: neither was any damage alleged or proved; - the declaration merely averring that in consequence of the acts imputed to the defendant the plaintiff was "likely" to lose his debt not that he had lost it.  The Jury retired for a short time and found a verdict for the defendant.  Counsel for the plaintiff Mr. WENTWORTH and Mr. KEITH; for the defendant Dr. WARDELL.   Boatman an aboriginal native was indicted for stealing two sheep the property of John Palmer Esq. at Ennindale in the district of Hunter's River on the 19th of Sept. last.  After the prisoner had been arraigned the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld who came up from Newcastle for the purpose was sworn as an interpreter.  The evidence having been gone through which went to show that the prisoner was one of a party of natives who drove away several sheep from the prosecutor's station.  Mr. THERRY who at the request of the learned Judge undertook the prisoner's defence objected to the jurisdiction of the Court on the ground that the aboriginal natives of the colony were not subject to the British laws.  The learned Judge said he would take a note of the objection for the consideration of the full Court should it be necessary.  His Honour then summed up the evidence and the Jury found a verdict of - Guilty. Remanded.  The learned Judge directed the gaoler if the prisoners behaved quietly not to keep him in irons.  Billy Bulli an aboriginal native was then placed at the bar and indicted for stealing four sheep the property of John Palmer Esq.  The Rev. Mr. Threlkeld acted as interpreter.  In this case also Mr. THERRY undertook the prisoner's defence.  Mr. Justice DOWLING asked Mr. THERRY if he renewed his objection to the jurisdiction of the Court in this case?  Mr. THERRY said he did. It was in his opinion a most important question whether the aboriginal natives were subject to our laws. He had considerable doubt upon the subject and wished that it should undergo the most mature consideration.  Mr. Justice DOWLING said the regular course of proceeding was to plead to the jurisdiction. He admitted the subject to be one of deep importance to the colony; because if there really were no law by which these people could be tried a question would then arise whether it would not be necessary to resort to the local legislature. With the consent of the Solicitor General he would take a note of the objection in the form in which it had been raised by Mr. Therry and draw out a case to lay before the Judges which might be argued on a future day.  The SOLICITOR GENERAL consented to assume that all the necessary preliminaries had been gone through and allowed the question to come on for argument in the manner proposed by His Honor.  The trial then proceeded.  James Casey examined by the SOLICITOR GENERAL. - I am a shepherd in the service of Mr. John Palmer; on the 29th of August I was our with our sheep near the Sugar Loaf; four black fellows came about 10 o'clock in the morning rushed among the sheep and took about 30 away; they kept four and the remainder found their way home again; next morning I found the four skins at the blacks' camp about 100 rods off; the blacks were not there; the prisoner was one of the men who took the sheep; I knew him by the name of Billy Bulli for about four months before; he was not above thirty yards from me when he took the sheep; he had a waddy a womorang and a spear in his hand; I hallooed to him to let the sheep alone; I have no doubt the prisoner was one of the men as he had been at the station several times; the prisoner can speak a little English; he understood a great deal of what I said and I of what he said.  Cross-examined by Mr. THERRY - Billy Bulli is the name by which the prisoner was known among the blacks; he had a gin; she was never away from him that I know of; I do not know it to be a custom among the stock-keepers to take away the black-fellows' gins; I can undertake to swear positively to the prisoner as being one of the party; I do not know it to be the custom to give away the diseased sheep to the natives; if I saw half-a-dozen natives I would not be able to swear to them six days after unless I knew them; I know of no marks on the prisoner's person but I would undertake to swear to him among a thousand.  This was the case for the prosecution.  On the part of the prisoner the Reverend Mr. Threlkeld was called and examined by Mr. THERRY.  I have some knowledge of the customs and language of the natives; I know frequent instances of their gins being taken from them by whites; in two instances I had to interfere and to appear at the Police Office; I have had repeated complaints from the blacks of their women being taken away from them for improper purposes; I do not think they supposed they had a right to retaliate on that account; they have a notion respecting the rights of property; they do not take what belongs to each other nor do they make use to any great extent of the opportunities they possess of taking the property of the whites; I think this arises from fear; they have no knowledge of the laws of England; they would readily be induced to steal a sheep for a trifling reward; I think one fig of tobacco would induce one of them to do it; their ignorance of the consequences of the offence would induce them to commit it.  By the Court - I have observed a remarkable shrewdness in the native tribes; they are shrewd and discover in their language strong reasoning faculties capable of moral improvement - indeed more so than some of the lower order of Englishmen; they display a remarkable cunning when they wish to accomplish any object; they make a distinction between free settlers and what they call "croppies" - that is prisoners; if they met a free man in the bush they would not hurt him but if they met a prisoner they would probably strip him; the reason of this is that when Newcastle was a penal settlement the commandants used to give them the clothes of all the runaway prisoner they apprehended as a reward; I do think they know right from wrong; from that natural instinct implanted in the heart of every human being; I resided for 8 years in the South Sea islands and I think that the natives of this colony are equally capable of moral improvement and civilization as the natives of those islands who have made such rapid improvement through the exertions of the missionaries; the natives of many of the South Sea islands are nominal Christians; as far as my knowledge goes there is no foundation for the opinion that prevails at home that the natives of this colony are utterly incapable of improvement; I form that opinion from a comparison and contrast between them and the natives of other savage countries; they are exceedingly particular with regard to the rights of property amongst each other; they will not allow any thing however trifling to be taken by one from another; they lend to each other and although not over-particular in exacting the return of the thing lent lending and giving away; they have distinct words for each in their language; they have also some idea of barter; the Newcastle tribes send up bundles of spears which they manufacture to tribes up the country and receive in return a cord made of the skin of the wallobi.  John Palmer Esq examined - I do not know it to be the custom to give away the diseased sheep to the natives for food but I know an instances wherein 120 diseased sheep were turned loose into the bush about three miles from my station by Mr. Sparke who now keeps the Australian hotel in Sydney; the greater part of these sheep were taken away by the natives and no enquiry made after them and from this circumstance I think it highly probable that they considered sheep of no value and that they might take them wherever they might find them; I had never known the natives to steal sheep before the last eighteen months during which period I lost upwards of 200 from my flocks.  The learned Judge summed up the evidence and told the Jury after the last testimony they had heard if they believed that the unhappy man a the bar had really taken those sheep under an impression that they were of no value they ought to give him the benefit of that view of the case and acquit him. The jury found a verdict of not guilty.  The SOLICITOR-GENERAL then rose and stated that after the conclusion at which the jury had arrived in this case and feeling satisfied had the same evidence been presented to them in the former case that their verdict would have been the same he did not feel warranted in calling for judgment of the Court on the man who had been convicted.  Mr. JUSTICE DOWLING after complimenting the Solicitor-General on the manner in which he at all times discharged his official duties in that Court said he perfectly coincided in the course pursued by the learned gentleman as well as in the conclusion to which the jury had come in this case. His learned friend Mr. THERRY who at His Honor's request had kindly undertaken the defence of the prisoners could not have been supposed having an unexpected duty suddenly cast upon him to be prepared in such a manner as if time for deliberation had been afforded him; or he was satisfied that the line of defence he had set up in the last case would have at once suggested itself to his accute [sic] and intelligent mind.  The two natives were then placed at the bar and discharged by proclamation.  Rex v Boatman & Bulleyes  The prisoner a Black Aboriginal native of the Colony was charged with Sheep Stealing.  I asked Solicitor General (M Dowel) how he proposed to interpret proceedings to the prisoner   Mr Solicitor General said he was provided with Mr Threlked a Missionary and black native conversant with English and the prisoners language.  The jury found the prisoner Guilty. Vide Vol 64. page 1.  [p. 11] Dowling J. The first question for consideration is whether the aboriginal natives of this Colony are subject to the jurisdiction of this court by the law of England. The general principle acted upon I believe with respect to these people since the foundation of this as a British Colony is to regard them as being entirely under the protection of the law of England for offences committed against them by the white settlers & subjects of the Crown & on the other hand to render them liable for any infraction of the British Law which may be injurious to the persons or properties of His Majesty's white subjects. We interfere not with their own habits customs or domestic regulations but leave them to adjust their own disputes & differences amongst themselves. Dirty Dick's case. Vol. 22 p. 98. But before a person of this description can be tried in this court it must be made to appear that he understands what is passing & is sensible of the liability he incurs; for if he does not understand what is passing he must be regarded as a person deaf & dumb or a lunatic. In other words he must be a reasonable & responsible being. Rex v Binge Mhulto Vol. 9. P. 100; but if he be a reasonable being & understand the nature of his present responsibility [p. 12] then I hold as at present advised that he is liable to the Britis [sic] law. His anomalous position as a savage native of a country which has become the territory of the British Crown disentitles him to the privileges of a foreigner of being tried by a jury half English & half foreigners even if the Act for the administration of justice in this country would authorize us in adopting a course of trial for which we have no machinery. Where should we find the materials for such a jury?  The second question then is whether the prisoner comprehends what is passing. This a matter to be determined by the evidence.  The 3d. whether he took the sheep with knowledge that he had no right to do so intending to convert it to his own use.  The jury found the Prisoner Guilty.   Supreme Court.  "MONDAY & TUESDAY DECEMBER g & 10 1833.  ("Before the Chief Justice and the usual Military Jury.)  "Anthony Hitchcock alias Hath John Poole James Riley John Parry David Jones and James Ryan were indicted for stealing on the 5th November 1833 in the dwelling-house of Mr. James Mudie at Castle Forbes in the District of Patrick's Plains sundry articles his property; one John Hart an inmate therein being put in bodily fear. Hitchcock and Poole were indicted also for maliciously shooting at Mr. John Larnack on the same day with intent to kill and murder him; and that the remainder of the prisoners counselled aided and abetted the said fellow - prisoners in the commission of the said felony.  "John Hart being sworn deposed that he was an assigned servant to Mr. John Larnack; on the 5th I was in the kitchen and saw some men running at the back part of the house; I ran out and one of the men presented a gun at me and desired me to go in again. Poole Jones Riley and Ryan were there; they ran into the house; I afterwards saw them come out with a double-barrelled gun a fowling-piece and a musket. I also saw Mrs. Larnack and one of the female servants jumping out of the dressing-room window; I saw Poole and Jones rush up to them and order Mrs. L. to stand telling her if she did not they would blow out her brains; they compelled her to go into the kitchen and stationed Riley at the door. I afterwards saw Hitchcock bring the shearers from the barn and I saw them put forcibly into the store and Perry was placed over them.  "I saw Poole bring out a chest of tea and pour its contents into a bag; some flour and pork was brought out of the provision store as well as sugar; two horses were brought out of the stable by Hitchcock and the provisions put on their backs. Mrs. Larnack and the rest of us were locked up in the wool store; they said they should leave a sentry and the first one that stirred for two hours they would blow out their brains. Riley told Mrs. Lamack that they wished her father (Major Mudie) was at home and they would settle him; they went away and Perry staid about five minutes after the rest; in about a quarter of an hour I got out at the top of the store and knocked the lock off the door but hearing a gun fired we all went in again. Six of them were armed; Ryan had a tomahawk which contained a knife and saw. I heard one of the men say he would bring in Mr. Larnack's head and stick it on a chimney. I have no doubt of the identity of the prisoners at the bar. There was a great deal of punishment about six weeks ago.  "John Larnack being duly sworn said; on the morning of the 5th November last I went to the river to superintend sheep-washing; between 12 and 1 o'clock I heard a voice exclaiming - 'come out of the water every bloody one of you or we'll blow your bloody brains out;' on looking behind I saw three men advancing towards me with guns presented; some others were at a short distance apparently with the intention of intercepting me should I escape from the other three; Hitchcock and Poole were two of the former number and Hitchcock called out 'that it was no use of thinking to make my escape he would take good care I should never take another man to Court;' they were about 10 or 12 yards off when this took place. They called to the washers to get out of the way as I stood between them and the prisoners.  "I jumped into the river among the washers and told them to stand by me as I was certain the prisoners would not fire for fear of hurting them. Finding the prisoners still pursuing I made the best of my way to the opposite side of the river; on turning my head round I saw Hitchcock levelling his piece at me and soon after I heard a shot fired and on again looking round I perceived Hitchcock to be enveloped in smoke; I have not the least doubt that it was the prisoner Hitchcock who fired at me. He called to the washers saying - 'why did you not get out of my way I would have shot him.' There was a general cry among the party coming down to me of 'shoot the bugger;' Poole called out 'fire again I'll take care you shall never get another man flogged' and immediately a second shot was fired.  "I was just then getting out of the water on the opposite side of the river; I could not perceive who fired the second shot. Hitchcock and Poole now cried out 'fire again let's settle him he's almost finished;' a third shot was fired as I was getting up the bank on the opposite side. A voice called out 'fire again let's follow him;' an answer was made 'no take care of your ammunition he's almost finished;' I made the best of my way to Mr. Dangar's farm and returned to Castle Forbes on the following day. I was certainly very much frightened. Either Hitchcock was a very bad shot or he must not have intended to hit me as he could not well have missed me at ten yards distance.  "Robert Scott being sworn deposed that he is a Magistrate of the Territory and went with mounted police and constables in pursuit of an armed party of prisoners on the 13th November last assisted by some black natives; we traced them to Mr. Dutton's where we heard that seven men had robbed the place the evening before. We traced some footsteps and about 12 o'clock we saw some smoke arising from a brush; we saw a man running down from an eminence and we supposed him to be the sentinel. We charged immediately and I saw the mounted policeman Craddige fire at some person on the rocks. I saw three men running away; I dismounted and followed; the man with the musket I commanded to lay down his arms; he would not and I shot him; I then sprang towards the other two and bade them hold up their hands which they did. They were Riley and Perry and the man who was shot told me his name was Henderson. Hitchcock and Poole were in the custody of Craddige. Afterwards in galloping around the ravine I discovered Ryan concealed in the scrub. There was a frying pan on the fire melting lead; the prisoners gave themselves up without much resistance. [150] The place was about 17 miles from Castle Forbes and we marched the prisoners to Maitland which was about 11 miles off.  "Other witnesses gave evidence which corroborated the statements of the previous deponents.  "On being called for their defence the prisoner Hitchcock first addressed the Court. He said the treatment he had received at Castle Forbes was harsh in the extreme; he had been several years in the Colony and while in the employment of the Crown had been so fortunate as to gain the esteem of his superiors by whom he was placed in a situation of trust and responsibility in charge of the Post-Office at Newcastle. It was to the unfortunate circumstance of being assigned to the service of Major Mudie he attributed all his subsequent misfortune and present unhappiness. He had been in possession of an exemplary character before he went to Major Mudie; he had since been repeatedly flogged by which and by the unwholesome food he had subsisted on his health had been ruined and life itself rendered burdensome. Whatever punishment was threatened by the master to his servant was always sure to be inflicted by the Bench and this was the way in which justice was administered on the Hunter. If they refused to labour on a Sunday flogging was threatened and as surely given. Servants who had for months been due for tickets-of-leave had been refused their indulgence and if at all importunate a flogging bestowed rendered future application unnecessary. If the Court would but look at their bare backs it would see that their statements were not exaggerated.  "The prisoner Poole had only to re-echo what the last prisoner had said. Bad treatment by Messrs. Mudie and Larnack had brought them to the ignominious fate to which they were about to be consigned. He had addressed a letter to the Principal Superintendent of Convicts complaining of this bad treatment; but the letter had been intercepted by Mr. L. and kept back. He was aware that any thing they could urge in their behalf; would be of little avail - their doom was fixed; but he solemnly implored the Judge to cause an enquiry to be made respecting the treatment of assigned servants at Major Mudie's in order to prevent others from being forced into the unhappy situation in which they were placed.  "The Chief Justice addressed the prisoners and after a very pathetic address passed the awful sentence of the law directing them to be executed at such time and place as His Excellency the Governor should be pleased to appoint."  Hitchcock and Poole were forwarded to Maitland by the steamer Sophia Jane on Thursday evening 19th December to suffer the extreme penalty of the law two days later at the scene of their depredations. The same awful fate befell the other three prisoners Riley Perry and Ryan at the usual place of execution in Sydney at the same time on the 21st December. Jones was transported to Norfolk Island for life.  I will make no further comment upon these extraordinary trials than to express my cordial approval of the proceedings of the Commission of Enquiry which succeeded them. If the whole of the allegations of these unfortunate men were not substantiated enough was unquestionably proved to exhibit a deliberate system of maltreatment which even the most degraded of the human species would not calmly have endured. Yet the indisputable fact remains that whatever may have been said in the Report the five principal complainants who made the charge that brought about the enquiry are now lying in ignominious graves.  It will now be my duty Sir to point out to you that Mr. Larnack has not only been guilty of barbarity in striking and ill-using prisoners; but has added to the miseries of their slavery the horrors of starvation - in a country like this where provisions are proverbially plentiful and good can lead only to disobedience and rebellion. Men speak Sir in England of the happiness and comfort of a convict: alas ! do but look on the picture - the plain and faithful portrait of a loudly-eulogised and complete agricultural establishment Castle Forbes. The meat is proved to be nauseous and unpalatable; a working bullock breaks its leg and the meat is served out to the men. Those who know the condition of working bullocks will readily appreciate the sorry banquet which a number of hard-working hungry men must have enjoyed over the taint and sinewy flesh of such an animal.  But oppression Sir is not confined to bad food. It displays itself in the violent behaviour of the master who in fits of intoxication or anger wreaks vengeance upon the unhappy mortals whom the British Government commit to his paternal or at least humane custody. What opinion Sir are we to form of the morality of the man who considers the holy Sabbath as unworthy of regard; and who insists on working his men on that day. Is it Sir surprising that crime prevails here when a man is actually punished by a Bench of Magistrates with a flogging for refusing to profane the Sabbath?  No two gentlemen in the Colony could have been selected of greater intelligence and more honourable independence than those composing the Members of this necessary Court of Enquiry. I will here ask did Mr. Larnack disprove any of the charges respecting the badness of the provisions Did he show that good meat was given in lieu of bad - Did his equivocal explanation of stopping the letters of complaint look like the conduct of a man conscious of his own innocence - Why did he not have the author of them arraigned at the bar of justice for false and malicious accusation has he or Mr. Mudie proved their conduct towards the unfortunates in their power to have been humane?  Major Mudie assumes a right of censure and points out the turpitude of others without recollecting that cruelty is a crime ten times more inexcusable than the burglar's violence or the highwayman's fury who in putting a pistol to your ears demands your purse or your life and politely expresses his regret that necessity obliges him either to rob or murder you. There is no necessity however that can excuse cruelty. The Major complains that the men examined were allowed "not to give evidence of their own misconduct but to criminate their master." What was the object of the enquiry ? Was it not to ascertain to what extent the assertions of the unfortunate men now lying in their graves were founded in fact The result is any thing but complimentary to the humanity of the Major.  In fact Sir the whole tenor of the evidence seems to imply that the unhappy men who were executed sought an innominious death rather than submit to evils arising from persecution which they were unable to endure. Is not transportation under these circumstances WORSE THAN DEATH ! HUMANITAS  The object of the company in the first instance was to assist the commissioners or rather to co-operate with the commissioners in carrying out the establishment of the colony according to the Act of Parliament. First of all by purchasing a proportion of the land necessary to raise the £35000 which was required by Act of Parliament to constitute the acts of the commissioners legal. The next operation was to provide shipping for the purpose of supplying the colony with the necessary means of planting an institution of that kind in a distant land also for the purpose of establishing a sperm and black whale fishery because we felt that unless we established a colonial trade there would be no means of providing employment for the labourers and if we could not obtain money for the purpose of employing the men on shore as well as at sea the colony was not likely to progress. We were afraid of a re-action after the first emigrants were placed down in the colony in case they found no employment and that they would emigrate to the neighbouring colonies. To meet that difficulty we sent out ships and officers with the necessary capital for the erection of houses and various other establishments connected with the whale fishery and the white fishery also trawlers and others with a view of exporting white salt fish to India and China. And in addition to that having land which was purchased in the manner I have alluded to we thought it our duty to cultivate land to the utmost extent of our means; we considered that the emigrants generally especially those who proposed to undertake business ought to have the means of a circulating medium and consequently we established a bank on the arrival of the first detachment. We sent out coasting vessels of from 100 to 200 tons to import provisions from the neighbouring colonies feeling confident that the emigrants sent out by the commissioners could not raise provisions immediately and that consequently they would require a supply from distant parts; besides we felt that in the establishment of a new colony there ought to be extensive flocks and herds therefore the first movement that some of our vessels adopted after reaching the colony was to import cattle and sheep from Van Diemen's Land and New South Wales. Besides we were aware that there was a great degree of antipathy in the minds of the Australian colonists and the Van Diemen's Land people to this new attempt at colonization; yet we felt as a Board of directors that it was a great national undertaking and we had to make an experiment in the teeth of the animosity of our neighbours and if we did not defend ourselves by providing means of support we should be at the mercy of the neighbouring colonies as to the supply of provisions. [204] We therefore sent vessels to the neighbourhood and imported stock and provisions ourselves. [...] . Another object was to erect habitations for the coming emigrants.  Before Mr. Justice Burton with A. B. Spark and Thomas Barker Esquires Assessors.  Doe Cheers v. Kaines. - Mr. Windeyer opened the pleadings. It was an action of ejectment the declaration contained four devised defendant pleaded the general issue. The Attorney General in stating the case said it was an action of ejectment brought to recover possession of certain premises situated in Clarence-street. They had for some time been in possession of the defendant. The lessors of the plaintiff claimed through a person named Richard Cheers who died about the 20th July 1827. The parties interested in the prosecution of this suit were all relatives of his. He had made a will on the 20th February 1824 wherein he left these with other premises vested in trust. The trustees were a person named Ward and John Cheers the latter obtained probate. A suit was subsequently instituted and by a decree of the Court W. H. Chapman was appointed trustee instead of John Cheers who was then sole surviving executor about a month before his death he had gone to live with defendant who was prevailed upon to make over this property by deed of gift. Having gone fully into the details of the case he called  John Gurner - I am chief clerk of the Supreme Court; I produce the will of the late Richard Cheers dated the 21st February 1825; it was proved on the 21st March 1827 and probate granted to John Cheers Hunter's River as the surviving executor; the decree now shown me is the original decree appointing W. H. Chapman executor in lieu of John Cheers.  William Wilkins - I am a laborer and live in Phillip street; I knew Richard Cheers perfectly well; I recollect signing something for him; that is my hand writing; that is also Shuttleworth and Johnston's handwriting; Mr. George Allen sent this instrument to be executed; Johnston was a lodger of mine and also Cheers; Shuttleworth was a clerk to Mr. Allen; Richard Cheers had two families two children by the first wife and four by the latter; the property in George-street was left to the four latter; I knew Elizabeth Mary Ann James and William Cheers; I knew Hezekiah Ward he is now dead; during the time that Richard Cheers lived with me he had a house in Clarence-street; I used to draw the rent for him 10s. weekly; Kaines paid me the rent; Cheers was about 63 or 64 years of age when he died; I cannot be positive as to his age; he was old but hearty and liked his glass; I think I saw him about a month or six weeks before he died; when he left me he went down the Coal River to see his son who kept a public house there; when he returned my wife refused to take him back (that was four months after) because 10s. per week would not pay for his grog; he then went to Kaines and I never heard any more of him except meeting him promiscuously; when drunk he was a quiet man but would not comply with any thing when in that condition; his son Richard wished to make him drunk to get things from him but the old man would not comply whilst in that state; the last time I saw Cheers he was weak feeble and pale; he was in general a hearty man; Kaines lived a quarter of a mile from me; I knew Joseph Bradley he was hanged for forgery; when Richard Cheers could get drink he would take it; in the feeble state he was towards the latter part of his time four or five glasses would affect him.  Cross-examined - Kaines paid 10s. per week for the house at the time Cheers came to me; that was all he had to live upon; he had £220 in the Bank but which he lent to his son at the Coal River; when he returned he complained of his family that he had given them all he had and now they would not come to see him; he was then at Kaines's it was through my recommendation that he went to Kaine's; he had not other place to go to; I was a loser by keeping him; I sent in a bill to the Executors but never received any payment; I once offered to buy the house in Clarence-street; he said he would consider of it; this was long after the will was made; the other parts of his property he had made over by deed of gift to different parts of his family; Bradley was a good clerk and employed at different offices.  Re-examined - His daughter Harriet who was married to Welsh refused to take him in; some of the young children were staying with here but their maintenance was paid for by the Trustees; he was always fond of his young children; when I offered to buy the property it was after a fit of drinking; the reason why I wished the children present was that I wished to do it honestly and had no desire that they should suppose any unfair advantage had been taken of him.  Edward McRoberts. I am clerk of St. Phillip's church but not in the year 1827; I produce an extract from the burials April 22d. 1827. Richard Cheers butcher Sydney aged 77 years.  Wilkins recalled. I endorsed a note for £5 in favor of Mr. Kain I think on Tuesday; the money was for the purpose of supporting this trial; I live a A. B. Levy's but I sleep at Kain's; I pay 4s. per week; have not paid them regular I owe them money now.  Harriett Wyatt. I am a daughter of Richard Cheers by the first marriage; when he died I considered him to be about 60 years; he did not know himself; before he died he lived at Kain's 4 or 5 weeks before that; when he left off business he lived with me except for about two months with Wilkins; before he returned from Newcastle not having room in my own house I got lodgings for him at Williams' in Phillip Street; when he came to Sydney I told him what I had done and he went out for the purpose of going there but instead of that he went to Kain's; next day when I saw him I enquired why he had done so he replied he would go where he liked that was 4 or 5 weeks before his death; I saw him three times during that period twice in the street and the last time in Kain's house on the Sunday previous to the Tuesday when he died; he then appeared quite childish and I wished to take him home but Mrs. Kain refused to let him be removed without a certificate from Dr. Bland; I searched until 9 o'clock that night for the Dr when I found him he said my father was in no immediate danger then but removing him might make him so; he was almost childish for two years before his death; some time after the burial Kain came and claimed the writings belonging to the house he lived in as he only had a right to them; I told him to look at these children - as you have children of your own and say whether he could come for such papers; he said he had children of his own and must look after them; I did not have much more conversation with him felling indignant at his conduct.  Cross-examined. I took a room for my father in Phillip-street and the people were to find him board and lodging did not look at the room; I had only £130 per annum for the four children; John and Wm. Cheers had a deed of gift for the property they possessed; I think it was in Jan. he went to Kains.  Mr. W. Dowling Solicitor. I knew Mary Anne Cheers who I believe is now Mrs. Cahuac; I know W. H. Chapman he is trustee to the estate.  Mr. Foster said he would admit the assignment.  George Kerridge. I know the premises occupied by Kain; on the 8th of February I went and saw Mrs. Kain told her I claimed the property on behalf of the children; she said they held it by deed of gift and they meant to stick to it.  The will was then put in and read by the clerk it devised the house in question with other property to his children as was also the decree appointing W. H. Chapman trustee.  Mr. Foster in addressing the assessors for the defence said it certainly (he would admit) appeared a little ungracious in a party setting up a claim against the children of the party who makes a deed of gift but this was not an ordinary case. The children had already got the whole of his property except this and if the old man had imbibed habits of intemperance it was so much the more their duty (as it ought to have been their pride) to have taken care of him. He then commented upon the testimony adduced upon the part of the plaintiff and called the following witnesses.  John Snowden. - I am a small settler; I knew the late Richard Cheers and recollect his returning from the Coal River he had been there he said to get some money from his son John but was disappointed as he neither obtained principal nor interest; he was then lodging with Kaines; he complained that Mrs. Welsh or Wyatt and also Wilkins had refused to take him in; he sent for me and desired that I would go for Bradley who lived at the Royal Oak; he said from the kindness he had received from the Kaines's he wished to make the house over to them; Bradley came when I went for him; Cheers then told him he wished to have a deed of gift drawn up in order to pass the property to Kaines; Bradley drew it up and I signed it; he was quite sober for some weeks before he died and perfectly sensible when the deed was executed; Bradley myself and another all signed it at the time; Bradley read it over first when he desired me to read it over again; I did and he signed it; he had spoken three or four times to me before as to his having determined to sign over the property to Kaines.  Cross-examined. - When Kaines sent for me it was in the afternoon perhaps three or four o'clock; will swear I was not drunk that day; Bradley was at dinner when I went for him; he came as soon as he finished dinner; he might be half an hour in drawing up the deed; how Cassidy came to there to sign it I cannot say; I saw Cheers once or twice afterwards before he died.  Michael Cassidy. - I knew Richard Cheers living at Kaines's; a friend of mine lodged at Kaines's and going back and forward I used to see Cheers; remember having been asked to witness a deed; I made my mark to it; cold [sic] not tell the paper again; it was read over by the clerk (Bradley) and then by Snowden when Cheers said it was all right; he then signed it; he was then sitting during the time upon the side of the bed; the clerk wrote my name; cannot recollect upon what part I made my mark.  Cross-examined. - When I went into the room they told me they wanted my name to some deeds.  Betsey Murray. - I knew the late Richard Cheers when he lodged with Kaines; I was servant there at that time; Cheers was always well treated whilst there; I remember when he came there from the Coal River and have frequently heard him say he would make the house over to Mrs. Kaines.  Cross-examined. - I used to take him tea gruel &c; I never saw him get any run but that was not my business; Mr. And Mrs. Kaines used also to attend upon him; he was there between three and four months to the best of my belief; I was there when he died but don't recollect any will being made; they were sitting up with him for some nights perhaps a week.  ----- Bradley. - I am clerk in the Registrar's Office; the deed of gift was registered on the 15th the day after it is dated.  John Norris was called but owing to his not having left the court pursuant to the proclamation his evidence was objected to. A short argument took place upon the point when Mr. Justice Burton said he would not receive his evidence and ordered him to be find [sic] 40s. for contempt of court. This closed the case for the defence. In reply on the part of plaintiff Dr. Bland was called who stated that he attended Richard Cheers in the year 1827 to the best of his recollection in Clarence street; had repeatedly attended him before; his illness was generally occasioned through age and the effects of tippling; he was previous to his death in a state of confusion or stupor from the effects of drinking; he could not tell what he was doing; his daughter came to me and wished to have him removed as they wee dosing him with spirits in which opinion I concurred but being so weak I was afraid to move him; he died a day or two afterwards chiefly from having been kept in constant excitement through the use of spirits.  Cross-examined. - He drank hard after the death of his wife and seemed conscious he was not fit to manage property; he had no confidence in himself and vested his property in Trustees; he was quite in childish state.  Re-examined. - The treatment of Mrs. Walsh or Wyatt to her father was always kind and affectionate.  By the Court. - I do not think he was in a fit state of mind for some time before his death to make a will.  Thomas Shaughnessy. - I am an undertaker; knew Richard Cheers for twenty-five years and buried him at last; recollect his going to Kaines's house; used frequently call into see him partly on my own account and partly through the solicitation of his daughter Mrs. Walsh; he was at Kaines's five or six weeks; he used to drink hard beginning about 5 o'clock in the morning; he continued drinking when at Kaines's; saw him there two or three times a week; he appeared in a state of stupidity; I told his son a few days before his death that if he did not remove the old man he would not last long.  Cross-examined. - I never saw him outside the door after he went to Kains's. I called out of friendship to see him not for the sake of a job.  Re examined. - His son paid me the funeral expenses.  The Attorney General then replied upon the whole of the case and commented with considerable severity upon the nature of the evidence adduced for the defence.  Mr. Justice Burton then commenced putting the case to the assessors but they without troubling His Honor to go through the evidence intimated they were satisfied and returned a verdict for the plaintiff.  SATURDAY AUGUST 6.  Before Mr. Justice Burton and a Civil Jury.  William Walker stood indicted for the wilful murder of Thomas Woods by shooting him with a pistol on the 22d May last in the district of Cassilis; and John Gore stood likewise indicted for aiding and abetting in the commission of the said murder.  Mr. Therry who conducted the case for the crown without making any statement to the Jury called  James Driscoll - I am assigned to Major Druitt upon his farm at Cassilis; on the 21st May I was in the lock up of Mr. Busby for being in the bush; I was sentenced to corporal punishment but had to wait; I gave myself up to Mr. Sibthorp by superintendent; when I absconded Gore with Reiley Field and Gray went with me Gray was with me and Lipscomb in the lock up; the other prisoner belongs to Mr. Fitzgerald's station; on the night of the 24th May the two prisoners came to the lock up (we were all asleep at the time) they knocked at the door the constable Wm. Byrnes enquired who was that? one of them said he had got a prisoner whom he had found in the creek; Byrnes went for a piece of wood for a light; when he was putting the wood on the fire Walker said don't make a light I want some tea and sugar; Byrnes point to a box said there it is; they then put the constable into a corner and tied him up; they searched the place Walker enquired how many men he had in custody? he said four; Walker then said you have got a man named James Driscock; Byrnes said yes; Walker then ordered two to come out and then another and then they ordered me to come out; we all stood at the fire for a time the constable remaining tied up; the prisoners then tied Woods and myself together by the hands; Walker stood at the door with a pistol in is hand his face was painted and he had on a pea jacket; it was Gore who tied us up; the constable asked what they were going to do with us; they said to carry the swag for them; Walker told Gore to take a bayonet which was at that time stuck in the wall; they then opened the door and were going out when I said to Walker young man I don't want to go into the bush; he put a pistol to my head and bid me hold my tongue; Woods and me then by Walker's orders each took a bundle Gore walked first Woods and me in the middle and Walker behind with the pistol; they made us walk on the side of the road; we went towards Jones' Road and halted near to Binnagaray upon a little ridge; day then was beginning to break Gore struck a light and said they would have some tea; we made a fire Gore put a large tree on the fire. Gore then ordered us to stand up back to back and tied our four hands together; he then said he would tie an handkerchief round our eyes so that we could see which way they went; Walker was sitting at this time upon a log with a pistol in his hand; when Gore tied our eyes he stepped to one side; the pistol was then fire Woodsfell and me with him; Walker was about four feet from us; when he fired he came round and stood over me; he struck me twice with the butt end of the pistol on the forehead and knocked me down a little afterwards I got up and ran away Walker after me; when I had got a little distance I fell down over a tree; when I got up I saw Walker returning and in a little time saw Gore and him standing by the fire; cannot tell whether Woods struggled or not being myself so frightened; I made for Binngoroy station when I got there I saw James Ryall I told him what had happened at the lock up; I stopped there about an hour and a half when Gore came I ran out of the hut and concealed myself behind a sheep yard; I was then called in by one of the men; Gore met me at the door he said to me "you are a lucky man my life is in your hands;" he asked me if there was any blood on his face; there was not; his face seemed to have been washed; he asked me to say nothing about it being frightened I promised him I would not; he then got some water to wash the blood off my face; I had a basin of milk; he then asked me to go into the bush with him but I refused and went on to the head station where Mr. Sibthorp was; I saw him and told him that two men had come to the lock up and taken us out; I mentioned the name of Gore but not that of Walker; I did not know him; that was about seven or eight o'clock in the morning; the next day I was taken to see the body; I then said he was the same that had been tied to me; the body had been brought to Binngenay by those who found it; it was much burnt and shrivelled up; there was a wound on the breast but it did not show plainly from having been burnt; Walker was facing Woods when the pistol was fired; Gore and I took the bush together; I stopped with him two days when I gave myself up; during that time we robbed a sheep station belonging to Mr. King; we got some tea and sugar and a pea jacket; it was by Gore's desire that we separated in the bush? when I met Gore at Binnegoroy he said that he had heard I told Mr. Busby of the robbery at Mr. King's. (Further corroborative evidence being heard - the learned prosecutor for the crown called.)  Luke Sibthorpe. - On the 20th May last I was at Bennegillaroy; I saw Woods on that day - stopt and searched him he said he had been robbed of a pistol the night before; I took him into custody and gave him in charge of a constable; on the Sunday morning I received a note from Mr. Busby to muster as many men as I could - to get a black boy and meet him without delay. (He then corroborated part of Driscoll's evidence.) They went to track them. We could not see any tracks but the black boy ran them easily and said in his native tongue that there were four. Blacks are so quick in tracking that he showed us where they had stumbled over bushes in the night and the cause of their fall. As we were going along Mr. Busby cried out Good God! here is the body. It was laying on a fire against a forked tree. I recognised it immediately; it was laying partly side ways but not so much consumed as to prevent identification. The black boy got sick and declined tracking any more that day but said when the sun rose on he morrow he would be able to track the prisoners. We afterwards proceeded to Walker's hut and took him into custody. Thinking that Driscoll had something to do in the murder I ordered him to go up to see the body. When brought to view the body I said Driscoll is not that a horrible sight? He put both his hands up to his face and burst out a crying and said "Sir Gore is one of the men who murdered him I don't know the other man's name." (Driscoll then told him the same story as given in his evidence above.) This closed the case for the prosecution.  Mr. Windeyer Junior on the part of the prisoners then took two objections: 1st that since the issuing of the King's proclamation in November last making legal counties in this colony all the legality applied to them as to counties in England. In all informations at home it was required that the particular country wherein the offence had been committed should be set forth. In this information it merely said in New South Wales to wit whereas the country also should have been specified.  Mr. Justice Burton said he was quite willing to hear any argument upon the point but the practice alluded to did not apply here for this reason - that the Supreme Court sitting here had jurisdiction over the whole colony whilst by the English Common Law the offender must be tried in the county where the offence has been committed. If circuit courts were established here the objection might be good but at present it was only one large country. He however would take a note of the matter.  Mr. Windeyer said the next point was that the name of the deceased had not been properly proved viz.: as to whether it was Wood or Woods as it ought to have been according to 2nd Hale page 181. In support of his opinion he alluded to the case of Sheen for the murder of his child.  Mr. Justice Burton considered that the question of identity of person was one for the Jury; but even if it were good it would be of no advantage to the prisoners inasmuch as he would immediately direct a fresh information to be drawn up against them.  Two or three witnesses were then called but their evidence contained nothing material.  His Honor previous to summing up requested the Jury would stand whilst he was going through the evidence in order that their attention might be kept awake as no doubt from the length of time they had been sitting some of them were fatigued. When he had gone very carefully through the whole case the Jury retired for five minutes and returned a verdict of Guilty.  His Honor then proceeded to pass sentence in doing which he observed that it then became his duty to pass upon them that sentence the most awful a Judge could pass as it was to usher them before the Great Judge of all the world. The Jury had found them guilty after a long and impartial trial. He (himself) had no doubt whatever of their guilt; he could have felt no hesitation whatever in returning the same verdict. There were few cases perhaps in which the guilt of the parties was rendered more plain than their's. It had pleased the Almighty God to place around them such circumstances as could not fail to establish a conviction. They might have thought that the darkness of night would conceal their guilt but it was well for all to know that where blood was shed the perpetrator rarely escaped in this world or if he did still an awful judgment awaited him in the next. Short was the time between a murderer's conviction and his groan! He entreated them as they knew they would shortly have to appear before an all seeing Judge to prepare themselves by a confession of their guilt not so much for the satisfaction of their Judges here but by clearing their own conscience they might be the better prepared to enter into the presence of the Great Judge of all. He then proceeded to pass sentence of death upon them and ordered them for execution on Monday morning.  Burton J 8 August 1836  Before Mr. Justice Burton.  The two men William Walker and John Gore tried on Saturday were again put to the bar this morning. - His Honor addressing them said - "Prisoners you are now placed again at the bar in order that a certain part of your sentence may be amended. You were convicted on Saturday and sentenced to death. There was however an informality in that sentence and the Judges have caused it to be amended. The Court would have been grieved to have brought you here unnecessarily but you have been given longer time for repentance of which I trust you make the best use in your power." The sentence of the Court was that they should be taken to the place from whence they came and on Wednesday morning to the place of execution and there be hanged by the neck until they were dead their bodies afterwards to be given over to the Surgeons to be dissected and anatomised.  (It was the latter part of the sentence which constituted the informality it having been omitted in the sentence passed on Saturday.)  MURDER.  Before the Chief Justice and a Civil Jury.  James Smith stood indicted for the wilful murder of John Haydon by cutting his throat with a razor on the highway between Bungonia and Murulan on the 22d of September last. Mr. Therry briefly opened the case and called  James O'Neale - I take the mail from Bungonia to Marulan; on the 22d September was carrying it to the latter place; saw nothing then; on returning I found upon the road a body thought it was asleep; when I came up to the man I saw a razor laying across his breast and also a box key; saw the razor bloody on his breast and his head fairly turned back; he was quite dead; I had passed the same way about an hour before but then saw nothing; when I perceived the body I looked and saw some sawyers working near the spot; I brought them to the body and left them in charge of it; I went then for the police at Bungonia; the body was dressed in a blue jacket and fustian trousers; the lining of his left hand pocket of trousers was turned; the breast of the clothes and the ground were all bloody; I think no man could cut his own throat in that manner and then lay the razor and key in the mode they were upon his breast.  Cross-examined - Have travelled that road for two years alone and never been stopt.  Samuel Maylor - Am a rough carpenter; I met O'Neale in September last; he came to the sawyer's hut; we had some tea and then proceeded to the body; I went first to borrow a blanket; after that searched for a track; found a bloody track 200 yards across the bridge when there I saw a black hat and handkerchief; at the back of a little bush close to the bridge a dog was lying down near the spot; I went back to the body and stopt till Dr. Reid came; when Dr. Murphy and Mr. Futter examined the body but could not recognize him them; the next day when the body was carried to a shepherd's hut I recognized his face; I believe him to be John Haydon; had seen him often before at different parts and knew him well by person but not by name until about three months before his death.  Cross-examined - The dog was laying down but did not follow us; the dog was 200 yards from the body; to the best of my belief the body was that of John Haydon; never saw the dog before that time nor ever saw it in presence of the prisoner; the dog was within 6 to 10 yards when we found the hat and handkerchief.  Richard Jawers - Am a Settler at Bong Bong; John Haydon lived with me eight years and better; left me about three months ago had with him then in going towards the New Country a dog a little brindled called "Turkey" but nothing like the dog I have seen to-day; never saw it before; I saw Haydon alive about six weeks ago; saw him dead at the Gaol of Parramarrago Inverary near Dr. Reid's about a month ago; am sure it was the body of Haydon.  James O'Neale -- I saw the same dead body lying at the Inverary lock-up and saw the last witness (Jawyers) going to recognise the body; spoke to him upon the subject.  Richard Jawers recalled. - When he left me the last time to go up the country he was riding a black mare belonging to me; have seen the mare to-day it is the same.  Cross-examined. - I believe I have had the mare for three years; have rode the mare many times; she was branded J; the mare knows me and I can swear to her; I was once in trouble but Mr. Rowe cleared me out; did not take much trouble about my cattle; I saw the mare again coming down in the custody of the police; knew her directly.  John Foy. - Am a farmer living at Boro; deceased left my house on a Wednesday morning; saw him four days afterwards at Inverary gaol he was then dead; it was the body of the man whom I knew as Haydon who left my house four days before; he had a dog with him but which was then lost; when he left my place he expressed a determination to look for it; he had a razor and a key with him also a dark handkerchief; he was about my age; I am about thirty eight; would know the razor and could swear to the key; he wore such a handkerchief and hat as those now produced; I found them at Lynch's in Bungonia; the hat I bought myself and can swear to it from the size.  Samuel Maylor. - The razor key and clothes now produced appear to be the same as those I saw near the body.  McCauley. - Knew John Haydon; he called at my house on the 22nd September; he was riding a dark-brown mare; went with him to the store of Mr. McGillvray; he wanted change for a £1 note; Mr. McG. could not change it; it was No. 83 upon the Bungonia Bank (note produced); that is the note; prisoner was standing outside the store when we got there; I heard prisoner tell deceased he was going down to Sydney to stand his trial; they appeared to be acquainted; prisoner and deceased went away together; the things now produced I got from Maylor: I knew the jacket; had it from Mr. Hume; the jacket I had seen worn by Smith on that very morning and several times before; had known prisoner upwards of four months; he was overseer to Mr. Kenny of Lake George; could recognise the jacket by particular marks it bore; the murder was reported to me about three or four hours after I had seen prisoner and deceased; I recognised the body to be that of John Haydon; I went in search to Mr. Gray's a publican at Sutton Forest and got there a £1 note; I got this note at Gray's house; I picked it out from some others which were in Jervis's hand who is a butler or waiter to Gray; I took up some of Mr. Barber's men first upon suspicion but I am now convinced of their innocence; there were wounds on the head which seemed to have been inflicted by a hammer; might have been done by the handle of a whip.  Cross-examined - Saw other Bungonia notes but did not look for any other than the one I had seen in possession of deceased.  James Loughlin McGillivray - I am a store keeper at Bungonia; saw the prisoner on the 22d September there about 9 o'clock in the morning; he was alone; I supplied him two figs of tobacco he was dressed in a fustian jacket and trousers straw hat and laced boots; that is the jacket; whilst he was filling his pipe I observed a button drop from his shirt and picked it up and placed it in the adjoining room of my store; that is the button; I have every reason to believe that is the jacket it corresponds in every way with that prisoner wore; he had a dog with him; it was the same I have seen this morning; about ten minutes after prisoner left; deceased came in with McCauley; he handed me a Bungonia note and wished for change; returned it to him saying I had not sufficient change; he and McCauley went out together and saw nothing more of them; when prisoner was in the house I enquired if his dog was vicious; he replied yes and at nine months old would seize a man or words to that effect.  Cross-examined - It appears an ordinary jacket but I had not seen many like it up there before; no person except prisoner and the other two came in at the time; directly they went out I picked up the button say ten minutes after.  John Taylor - I am a carpenter at Bungonia; I saw prisoner at McGillivray's store on the 22d Sept.; whilst working at the bench saw two men with a brown mare going away; prisoner had on a white suit but took no particular notice.  Andrew H. Hume - I am a grazier in Argyle; I received information of a murder being committed there on the 22d September; I saw the body in consequence of information; I went in search and found the track of a horse which I followed to a large tree there saw a check shirt folded up under the butt of the tree I found a white coatee [sic] or jacket on the left arm was fresh blood; that is the jacket; I then called a constable and delivered over the things to him; there was nothing in the pockets; the horse had come in an easterly direction from where the body was found and from the bridge to where the dog was found; the horse had then turned to the southward about a rod where the jacket was found; I then tracked the horse into the old road; it had a broad round flat hoof but without shoes.  Jowers recalled - The horse was shod when deceased had the horse but worn very thin.  Thomas Macauley recalled - The morning I saw deceased he told me that the mare was without shoes and that being heavy in foal he was going to lead her down; observed myself she was unshod.  Henry Jarvis. - I am a book-keeper and sometimes wait at Mr. Gray's at Sutton Forest; about four o'clock in the afternoon prisoner came in as if from the stable the back way; he was in his shirt sleeves with a straw hat and a pair of fustian trowsers; he came with a dark brown mare; he had some refreshment; he asked me if I had a coat to lend him as he had got into a row at Major's Lockyer's the night before and lost his jacket; I then left the bar for a short time in the interim of which Mr. Gray returned home; when I went again into the bar he was trying on a jacket but did not buy it; before that he gave me a £1 to pay his reckoning which was 6s.; I gave him 14s in change; that is the note; it is of the Bungonia Bank; I gave it to my master; it was the only one taken that day; there was another one in the house but it had been taken some days before; McCauley came the same day and picked it out; there was a stain upon it then; that is the same stain; will swear it is the note I got from Smith; when he got his change he rode away without a jacket; the mare he rode was heavy in foal; have seen Smith several times at my master's house.  Cross examined. - I told McCauley that Smith had paid me a Bungonia note.  John Riley. - I live at Campbelltown; my father lives close by; on the 24th of September I was at his house; in coming from his place I met the prisoner leading a mare; did not notice how he was dressed; knowing him before I spoke to and asked him if that was the mare he had got the horse he had taken up to the new country; he said it was one he had got in exchange for the horse I alluded to; it was a black mare in foal; he went to my father's and had dinner and when done he proceeded to his father's house about a mile and a half from there; I saw the mare afterwards about the 8th of October at Campbelltown Court House; it was the same mare Smith had at my father's.  John McAllister - Am chief constable at Campbelltown; had an information against prisoner in October last proceeded to his father's house and found a black mare; brought it to Campbelltown to the house of prisoner's sister; Riley afterwards saw the mare and identified it as being the same prisoner rode to his fathers; the mare is now down in Sydney in Driver's stalls.  Richard Jowers - The mare in Driver's stable is mine.  John Dean - Am a Sergeant in the Mounted Police; apprehended prisoner near Campbelltown concealed in the bush at the back of the church; I had a warrant from Captain Allman upon suspicion he was in the bush; on passing along I heard a stick crack went forward and seeing the prisoner ordered him to come out; he asked what we wanted; I said come out or I would shoot him; he came out; and in going down the road told her not to fret as it could not be helped; I lodged him then in Gaol; a mare taken at prisoner's father's house; I brought it down this morning; Jowers has seen the mare and claims it as being his property.  Cross-examined - When his sister saw him; he was in my custody and could not but go with me.  Francis Murphy - Am a Surgeon; saw the body of Haydon on the 22d September lying near Bungonia by the road side; the throat had been cut by a sharp instrument; all the vessels around the neck had been cut through to the bone; the vertebrae was partly cut; it was quite impossible had he minded for him to have done it himself; there was a wound below the left eye which had broken the bone; another upon the left ear; these wounds were severe but not sufficient to cause death; the body was then warm and the wounds fresh; a razor was lying upon his breast with which I think the wound on the neck must have been inflicted.  Cross-examined - He might have had the wounds inflicted by the claw end of a hammer and then afterwards had his throat cut. This closed the case for the Crown. Prisoner said nothing in his defence but called three or four witnesses to character. They could not speak with any degree of particularity but had generally considered him an honest hardworking man.  The Chief Justice then went minutely though the whole of the evidence commenting upon each part for and against as he went along impressing strongly upon them at the same time that the evidence was chiefly circumstantial yet in the absence of all explanatory testimony if they believed the prisoner to be guilty they were bound in the virtue of their oaths to say so by their verdict. The Jury then retired after being absent about half an hour returned with a verdict of - Guilty.  Mr. Therry then prayed for judgment. Proclamation having been made prisoner was asked if he had anything to say why sentence of death; according to law should not be passed upon him. He merely asserted his innocence.  The Chief Justice then proceeded to pass sentence in doing which he observed that he most heartily wished that the declaration made by the prisoner was true but he (prisoner) could have no expectation that it could be believed his own conscience must tell him that he was guilty a Jury of his country had then found him guilty and he the (Judge) therefore was not at liberty to think that he was innocent. The whole course of the evidence must have convinced every one that he was guilty. Nothing but the quickness intelligence and activity of the Magistrates could have so clearly developed the various minute circumstances connected with the case. He deeply lamented that prisoner was a native and the first who had been brought to such an ignominious end not only for prisoner's sake but for the credit of the Colony did he lament it. His father mother and relations must all deeply feel the disgrace thus brought upon him (the prisoner's) self. What could have been his object so to attack a poor prisoner of the crown without cause - without offence? except merely for the trifle of money deceased had upon him. He entreated the prisoner if he had any particle of religion within his breast however dormant it might have been to call it into immediate exercise and make the best use of the short time which was then allotted to him. He would not dwell any longer on his unhappy case but proceed to pass the sentence of the law. He then passed sentence of death in the usual form ordering him to be executed on Monday morning and the body after death to be delivered over to the surgeons for dissection. The prisoner heard the Judge's address with much composure except that part which alluded to his parents. He was then removed from the dock. The Court was crowded during the whole of the trial.  Execution 14 November 1836  Execution. - Yesterday the utmost penalty of the law was carried into effect upon William Smith convicted on Friday last of a wilful and atrocious murder. Smith was a native of the colony about thirty years of age of a very strong and muscular frame. He was attended in his last moments by the Rev. Mr. M'Encroe being of the Catholic persuasion. He made no public statement as to his guilt and every arrangement being completed the drop fell and he was launched into eternity. His struggles before animation ceased were long and violent.  Thursday May 12. - Before His Honor Mr. Chief Justice Dowling.  On the opening of the Court the Clerk called the pannel and the following Jurors were fined for non attendance:- Thomas Burdekin Esq £5; Charles Beilby Esq £5; John Black Esq £5; William Barton Esq £5 and Mr. Charles Bones 40s.  When the Clerk ballotted the Jury Mr. Attorney-General addressed the Court and said that in the absence of almost all the special Jurors he would not go on with the case of the Deanes for stealing and receiving cattle. The names that had been called were almost all-publicans and in the absence of the merchants he would not risk the administration of justice in other hands; and he must remark that the persons who wished to bring the jury system into disrepute were the very persons who remained away because 40s. or £5 was a small sum to them and they did not care about it. He had no hesitation in saying that they had other motives in stopping away from their duty; and the Court must consider that he could not challenge except from cause which as the parties were so little known to him was tantamount to no challenge at all; he could only put them to one side until the pannel had been gone through when the very parties to whom he objected might then be put on the Jury.  The Clerk then proceeded to call the Jury and the following challenges were made: - Edward Borton publican by the Attorney-General; William Blackwell brewer by the Prisoners; William Buthee publican by the Attorney-General; Robert Batts publican by the Attorney-General; William Barnes publican by the Attorney-General; William Bruce publican by the Attorney-General; S. M. Burroughs land-holder by the prisoners; Joseph Barnett publican by the Attorney-General; Gregory Board by the Attorney-General.  S. W. Broughton tailor was called when Mr. Thomas Broughton stated that his name was no S. W. Broughton and objected to sit; he was accordingly excused. Mr. Brown junior saddler pleaded being a minor and no householder and was excused accordingly.  The following Jury were then sworn:- Robert Bourne mercer; Thomas Buxton wheelwright; William Brady cabinetmaker; John Burt baker; James Bibb blacksmith; Samuel Benjamin shopkeeper; Richard Binning saddler; Robert Broad silversmith; James Blanch ironmonger; William Byrne shoemaker; Thomas Byrne grocer; George Buckingham grocer.  John Deane stood indicted for stealing three head of cattle the property of W. C. Wentworth Esq at Penrith on the 15th of January last; and William Deane for receiving the same well knowing them to have been stolen.  Thomas Ashby a butcher at Parramatta deposed that on a Saturday some time in January he received notice from John Dean that he had brought a lot of cattle down the country for sale and witness said he would go out and look at them; he afterwards saw a young man named Beazley also a butcher and they agreed to go together on Monday morning; on Monday morning witness called at Beazley's and was told that he and John Deane had started shortly before on which witness rode on and overtook them about three miles on the road; they all three proceeded to William Deane's house on the western road; when they got there there was a lot of cattle between thirty and forty in a yard opposite William Dean's house and witness selected eighteen head out of the lot which were kept in the yard and the others were turned out in a paddock; during the time the cattle were being drafted William Deane stood at the fence looking on and a dispute having occurred about the price he said "What haven't you dealt yet;" William Deane said he had one beast in the lost; the price was at last agreed on at £4 a head and John Deane stating that he was in want of some money to take up a bill due at Sydney witness paid him £41 10s. out of the price of the cattle £71 10s for which he took a receipt on the bottom of the list describing the cattle given to him by John Deane; there were various brands on the cattle some JD with numbers some WW and others; but witness from the public manner in which the sale was effected had no suspicion of unfair dealing; the price he considered a fair one as the cattle were not first quality and some of them very poor; the three head of cattle claimed by Mr. Wentworth were amongst the lot purchased from John Deane.  William Charles Wentworth. - In consequence of information I received from Ashby the butcher I proceeded with a man named Hugh Taylor on the morning of Thursday the 28th of January to William Deane's house on the western road; on my arrival there I saw a lot of cattle in a pound or yard opposite Deane's house in charge of Proctor the chief constable of Penrith and the prisoner William Deane was there; almost the moment I entered I saw a cow which I knew to be mine and shortly after two heifers which I also recognised; I asked William Deane how knowing what a notorious cattle-stealer his son John was he could allow him to bring a lot of cattle with sixteen or seventeen different brands to his place; at the first view I guessed that there was that number but as a matter of fact there were only thirteen different brands in thirty-five head of cattle; William Deane replied to me "I assure you Mr. Wentworth that the cattle only arrived yesterday when they were put into the paddock and I had no opportunity of seeing them before this morning;" knowing from what Ashby had told me that he was telling me a lie I said to him "do you persist in saying that they did not arrive until yesterday and that you had no opportunity of seeing them before this morning" and I cautioned him to be careful how he answered and I called on Proctor to witness the answer; he still persisted in the story; I then said to him "Why it is impossible for any man to see this lot of cattle without his knowing them to be stolen; besides there are only two or three head which purport to be your cattle and I know them to belong to John Dickson;" to which he replied "What to John Dickson? why his cattle are considered fair game for any one and are any man's property;" I said to him "Mr. Deane if this is the sort of morality you instill into your children I am not surprised that they are what they are;" the cattle I identified were one black cow with a white back branded with a W on the off hip and a W on the off shoulder a red heifer branded in the same way and a spotted heifer branded with a single W; I was quite sure of their identity both by the breed of the cattle and by the brand; some short time after I went to Penrith to give my deposition; when at the court-house the prisoner William Deane came up to me and said "Mr. Wentworth I am now satisfied that the cattle are all wrong and my son must be a great scoundrel to bring this on me" to which I answered "Mr. Deane you did not discover that to-day; you knew it before;" the cattle were given up to me by the magistrates and are now in my possession.  Cross-examined. - Some time back I sold John Deane a lot of wild cattle which were running in the new country unreclaimed; they were branded with DW and W and I sold them because I could not get them in; the cattle in question were none of those but my own private cattle of a very select heard which I was particular in breeding at Toongabbee; I have no doubt but the cattle were stolen two years back driven up to Argyle kept there for some time and brought down again for sale; it will be two years next month since I gave up possession of the Toongabbee estate and my cattle were all removed at that time and branded before removed; Mr. Atkins took the farm from my brother and entered on it when I left and I sold him a few cattle from my heard; Hopkins is my assigned servant and used to milk the cows on the Toongabbee estate; I must state that I was quite surprised on going to Deane's to see my private cattle there; I had received information that John Deane had some of my cattle but I expected to find those branded with my father's brand and not my private cattle; I cannot swear that I did see the three head of cattle I saw at Deane's before then but I am nearly certain that I saw the black cow and I am positive they are none of those I sold to Mr. Atkins; I brand my cattle in various ways; I used to brand them with WCW but gave that up on account of the brand being so large and clumsy; I also brand WW; when at the court at Penrith there were persons who said that the cow had never had a calf but Hopkins said she had and he had milked her; and since she was delivered up to me she has dropped a calf and goes into the bail like an old milker which proves that Hopkins was right in his assertion and that those who stated the contrary were wrong; William Deane was not in a passion when I said that his son was a notorious cattle stealer; he replied that his son had no business to be a cattle-stealer as he had given him full and fair and set him up in the world; I do not know that William Deane is deaf; I knew him to sham deafness to avoid sitting on the Jury but persons who know him better than I do have stated to the contrary and have relished it as a good joke and I have been told that he made a boast of it himself; I sometimes brand my cattle on the neck but always with WW; and the reason of my doing so is to distinguish the different breeds so that I may not be deceived in crossing the breed; I should say that I have missed at least fifty head of cattle from the Toongabbee estate from time to time and those I did miss were all my best cattle; I knew where they went to but I could never bring it home to the parties; I think the cow must be three years old and the heifers about two years and one month; some of the cattle I saw at Deane's were very poor and would only have been fit to throw into a rough contract; I was much dissatisfied with Ashby's conduct and told him at the time that he had given too little for the cattle.  William Hopkins a milkman in the service of Mr. Wentworth stated that Mr. W. had taken him up to Penrith to look at some cattle; and he there saw a black cow which he knew to belong to Mr. W as he had milked her about eighteen months ago at Toongabbee; she was branded W on the off thigh and W on the off shoulder; he also saw two heifers which he knew from having milked the mothers when they were calves; the mothers were at Mr. Wentworth's station at Bathurst; he did not recollect the cow being branded but had assisted to brand the heifers. (This witness who was an old man was rather vague in his description of the dates which appeared only the effect of ignorance and forgetfulness.)  John Proctor chief constable at Penrith deposed that in consequence of a letter he received from Captain Savage he proceeded to William Deane's house on the Western Road and took charge of a lot of cattle which he conveyed to Penrith and took an account of. The list produced was a true description of the cattle he so seized. (This witness corroborated the whole of Mr. Wentworth's testimony as to what passed in the stockyard between Mr. W. and William Deane.)  Charles Castles a constable at Penrith accompanied Mr. Hayes into a paddock belonging to William Deane to look for a bullock belonging to Mr. Hayes which had broke out of Deane's yard and there saw a lot of cattle having seventeen or eighteen different brands on them which considering to be very suspicious he told Mr. Hayes so and he concurred with witness and advised him to keep his eye on them. When they left the paddock and went to Deane's house he began to abuse Mr. Hayes asking him what business he had to go into his paddock to look at his cattle without permission. Witness gave information to Captain Savage who desired him to keep charge of them and assistance should b sent to him and accordingly he was joined by Proctor; William Deane told witness that he had one or two head of cattle in the lot and witness supposed him to be part owner of the cattle from the interest he took in them; witness saw Thomas Deane there just before Mr. Savage arrived but he absconded and has not been seen since; one of the cattle was sold to Captain Okeden of Minchinbury who drove it away; witness not thinking it safe to go after one at the risk of losing the rest and knowing if he lost the meat he was sure of the hide; when Captain Okeden drove the beast away William Deane stood in the middle of the road and his men drove the beast out of the paddock; the beast was branded JS No. 3 and the hide is now at Windsor court-house but nothing has been done in that matter. (This witness corroborated the former testimony as to other points.)  This was the case for the prosecution.  For the defence Mr. Charles Smith state that he had known William Deane for fifteen years and had a high opinion of his honesty; knew him to be a blustering rough-spoken man and that he had made himself many enemies by his bluntness; but was certain that he would not knowingly commit a dishonest act. - Mr. R Therry said that he was present at Windsor Quarter Sessions about two or three years ago when William Deane was charged with receiving cattle and that he was then acquitted; but on what grounds being a question entirely for the Jury he could not speak. - Mr. Robert Nichols deposed that William Deane was honorably acquitted of the charge against him at Windsor and witness thought very justly so as he was satisfied of his innocence. - Mr. John Thorne had known William Deane many years and never knew anything bad of him. - Mr. J. H. Grose gave William Deane a high character for integrity when he spoke of from experience for many years during which time he had had large commercial dealings with him; and if he were acquitted on this charge would lend him £1000 without security or any acknowledgment of the debt. - Written characters from the Rev. Henry Fulton and Dr. Harris were put in and read by consent of the Crown officer.  His Honor summed up at great length read the whole evidence from his notes and remarked that a strong feature in the case was the prisoners not bringing forward any evidence to account for the cattle being in their possession when it appeared in evidence that they had said the cattle could all be accounted for; also the circumstance of William Deane denying having seen them before the Thursday morning when Ashby had sworn that he was present on the Monday when they were drafted. Was this what would be expected from a man who was really innocent? The Jury must also look to the character given to the prisoner William Deane but character could not be considered if the fact were clear. If the Jury had any reasonable doubt of the prisoner's guilt then they would give the prisoner the benefit of the character and acquit him; but if they had no reasonable doubt they must reject the character altogether. With respect to the prisoners having been tried before and honorably acquitted they had nothing to do; they must try the case by the evidence laid before them that day and not allow their minds to be biassed by any former proceedings. He must remark however that a verdict of not guilty did not necessarily imply an honorable acquittal for a man might be found not guilty by the case breaking down for want of evidence or by a technical objection which would not amount to an honorable acquittal. The Scotch law provided a remedy for this doubt by allowing an intermediate and very salutary verdict of "not proven" which was given when the Jury were not satisfied of the innocence of the party accused but had not sufficient evidence to convict him; and by this means the verdict of not guilty was considered an exoneration from any guilty knowledge. The English law did not allow of this which was frequently to be regretted as the degree of a prisoner's knowledge of a transaction was left a matter of doubt by the verdict of not guilty. The Jury however would take all these circumstances into consideration and give them weight for what they were worth.  The Jury retired and after an absence of two hours returned into court and required His Honor to read the evidence of Mr. Wentworth Thomas Ashby and Charles Castles; the foreman stating that the Jury differed as to whether the cattle were not dispersed between the Monday and Thursday following. His Honor read the evidence through and the Jury again retired for half an hour when they returned into the court and delivered a verdict of Guilty against John Deane; William Deane Not Guilty.  Upon the verdict being declared the mob in the court-house commenced clapping of hands and evincing their joy at the verdict when His honor ordered the constables to take the disturbers into custody remarking on the shameless conduct of men who called themselves Englishmen in a court of justice.  William Deane was then discharged and the Attorney-General prayed the judgment of the court on John Deane.  His Honor in passing sentence remarked that it was pitiable to see a young man a native of the Colony in the disgraceful situation in which he stood. He could not but regret in common with every thinking man the obloquy that was thrown on that body by the prisoner's conviction. He pitied the prisoner because he had not received the benefit of a good example; had he had the advantage of the wise counsel of a good and virtuous father as it had been represented that day he had had he would not have stood in the disgraceful place he occupied; but as it was the old man (his father) and his family would share the disgrace that must attach to his guilt. He had no discretion in the sentence he must pass upon him which was that he be transported from the Colony for the period of his natural life.  Dowling A.C.J 29 June 1836  Bull v. Wilson. - This case which has excited much public attention came on for trial on the above day before the Chief Justice and a Special Jury.  Mr. Windeyer (with whom were the Attorney General and Mr. Foster) opened the pleadings setting forth the nature of the action which was for a violent assault in horsewhipping the defendant &c.  The Attorney General stated the case on behalf of the plaintiff of the circumstances of which he was satisfied the Jury were aware from the publicity they had acquired. In laying the case before them he was unwilling to conceal any thing. He was ready and anxious that the whole facts should be known. His client was the Editor of the Colonist newspaper - a paper established not merely for the discussion of politics commerce agriculture literature and science but also for the discussion and promotion of the interests of religion and morality. For this latter purpose this newspaper had devoted its utmost energies and amongst its efforts in this pursuit it had condemned and exposed the state of disgraceful concubinage in which many person were living in Sydney. In this pursuit too he had not spare the wealthy members of the community - he had furnished portraits of several of those most conspicuous for immorality after the fashion of "Lodge's Portraits." Many of these persons were to be seen driving in gigs with their mistresses - some of them married men deserting their houses and families cohabiting with married women and with them visiting the Theatre and other places of public resort. The learned Counsel here went into a description of the visitors of the Theatre whose conduct he censured. He was himself an approver and supporter of the legitimate drama believing that in the words of the Poet "its end both at the first and now was and is to hold as `twere the mirror up to nature; to shew her own feature scorn her own image and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure." After lamenting that the drama had been diverted from its proper objects in this Colony he proceeded to vindicate the claim of the Colonist to the approbation and gratitude of every good citizen for the zeal and ability with which it advocated the interests of morality and religion and putting down by exposure and just censure the system of open and barefaced profligacy that prevailed in this immoral community. The conduct of the defendant came under the observation of the Colonist and he became the subject of an article in that paper entitled "The Family Man." It had been written to expose the conduct of the defendant who was living with a Mrs. Taylor an actress of the Sydney Theatre and a married woman who lived with her husband happily but from whose society she had been seduced. It was to expose and censure conduct such as this that the poem had been written. It was only a moderate and merited exposure of such conduct of the defendant who was at this time - it should be borne in mind connected with various religious societies. It was a public disgrace that a person who was living in this state should take a prominent part in such societies and the hyprocrisy [sic] of such a connexion was a fit topic for the animadversion and censure of the Press. The learned Counsel then proceeded to read the Poem and comment upon it in a strain of much humour - after which he described the assault as a most aggravated one. He described the defendant as coming to the house of the plaintiff - rushing up to his bed-room and threatening within the hearing of his wife to inflict punishment upon him. At this time Mr. Bull was very ill and such was the effect of this visit on his wife that being then near her confinement she miscarried on the following day. - On the first day that Mr. Bull went out the defendant who was a stout man carried his threat into execution in George-street the most public street in Sydney -- with a whip he struck him several severe and violent blows tore his clothes and thus committed a most violent assault in the presence of the Second Police Magistrate who would testify to the fact. The Jury would bear in mind that Mr. Wilson was a wealthy man - that in the words of the song he had a splendid "show room" which would go in some way to satisfy the damages of this action which was an action for a most wanton assault committed under the most aggravated circumstances.  Three witnesses were called on behalf of the plaintiff. Mr. Kerr of the Colonist newspaper who was at the house of Mr. Bull when Mr. Wilson called on the day of the publication of the Colonist in which "The Family Man" appeared. He stated that Mr. Wilson was shown up stairs to the room of Mr. Bull - that he there enquired of the name of the writer of the Poem. Mr. B. refused to give the name of the author but told Mr. Wilson his course lay open to him or words to that effect. Mr. Wilson on coming to the house enquired of Mrs. Bull if Mr. Bull was very ill to which she replied "only a severe cold." Mr. Wilson's manner was very violent and on leaving Mr. Bull he said sufficiently loud for Mrs. B. to hear him that he (Wilson) would make Bull's back smart for it.  Mr. Windeyer the Second Police Magistrate certified to the assault which was the severe infliction of several blows with a horsewhip on the back and person of Mr. Bull in George-street close to Wilson's own house. Mr. W. interfered and restrained the defendant from further violence. Mr. W. had read the Poem of "The Family Man" and considered it calculated greatly to irritate the defendant and to injure him in the estimation of his neighbours.  Dr. Nicholson deposed to the delicate state of Mr. Bull's health. He had been in attendance on Mr. B. for several days previous to the assault; he was considerably worse afterwards. If every body believed what was stated in the Poem he did not think the defendant could be much injured by it.  This was the plaintiff's case.  Mr. Therry on behalf of the defendant said that if he possessed any of the attributes of eloquence or ingenuity for which his friend the Attorney General had given him credit this was not a case that admitted of any scope of occasion for their display. He would with confidence rely upon the plain and sound discernment of twelve impartial men to appreciate the nature and character of this action. It was an attempt on the part of this plaintiff after satiating himself with the slander of this defendant to seek further to injure and impoverish him by a demand of damages in an action for an assault which his own conduct had provoked. Happily however he had disentitled himself to damages or at least only to the minimum of damages which the law would allow. As to the assault it was not denied. Indeed after the testimony of that respectable witness Mr. Windeyer it would be an insult to the understandings of the jury to deny that an assault had been committed; but if the defendant were called upon to lay down a penny and demand three farthings change from the plaintiff the Jury would compensate the plaintiff beyond the extent of his suffering and punish the defendant beyond the measure of his delinquency. He (the plaintiff) had forfeited all claim to any thing but nominal damages - for his (Mr. T.'s) client stood before the Court in the position of claiming for his defence that he received the greatest provocation for what he had done that one man could receive from another. Before this assault he had slandered the defendant; since the assault he had slandered him weekly - and to-day again he slandered him through the instructions given to his Counsel. He gave his consent to hear every epithet of ignomy [sic] and disgrace upon him. Indeed his defamation of the defendant was notorious. The Attorney General had told the jury that he was sure they were aware of the circumstances of this case. Truly might he have told them so for who was not aware of them. The whole circumstances were within the knowledge of every person. They were celebrated in prose and property. The John Thomas affair and Andrew Wylie's letter were as common as household words; so also was the poem descriptive of the defendant's descent to hell to hire two devils to give Dr. Lang a thrashing. With what effrontery then can this plaintiff presume to come into Court to demand redress from a jury. He has proposed to redress himself. He has avenged himself with his own weapon of revenge and his weapon has been barbed with deadly venom of slander. It is a just sentiment which states that the crime of slander is greater than the crime of theft. There was another noble and perhaps as just a sentiment which regarded slander as a greater moral of offence than murder itself; for murder travelled not beyond the grave. The deed itself placed a boundary to its effects. When you take the life of a man you take that which at some time he must have lost; but when you take his good reputation you take that which might have endured for ever. The tomb places no limit to the voice and venom of slander which may continue for future generations to blacken the memory of its victim. Thus then did his client stand before the Court claiming as a provocation for what he had done - that the greatest offence had been perpetrated against him that one man can perpetrate against another. This plaintiff then having gratified his palate by a series of articles written in a spirit of the bitterest rancour in poetry or prose had not right to come before a jury and ask of them to put money in his purse. No! good Iago! No - you must be satisfied with the revenge which you yourself have sought and with which you were satiated. It was no excuse to say that these slanderous articles were not written by this plaintiff - it might be or he even supposed they were not - but he refused to give up the name of the real author and this only could excite pity for one who could submit to the degradation of pandering to the slander of another. But all these slanders were put forth we were told for the advancement of morality and religion. Indeed he was at a loss to know in what character to recognise his learned friend to-day. His speech was divisible into three parts - one was an address in support of religious reformation worthy of a Missionary Apostolic. The second was a criticism on the drama with an apt and beautiful quotation from the Father of the Drama and in the third and last part of the speech he recognised the character of the Attorney General speaking to the merits of this case. But upon this reformation point he would join with his learned friend. He denied that the cause of religion and morality required such impure alliance and such unholy help-mates as obscene poems and the dragging of our neighbours frailties before the public gaze. He had hitherto thought that the reformation of morals had been brought about by instilling into the mind principles of religion and planting the seeds of virtue. He had heard that the teachers and reformers of morals were careful that whatever could introduce error or passion from the mind should be removed - and that they were intent in forming them to habits of piety. With what morality could the virgin's mind be imbued from the reading of such obscene and doggrel [sic] verses as had been read that day. How could the youthful mind be improved or the faculties be expanded by reading the disgusting details of such letters as those of Mr. A. Wylie; what good precept can be imbibed or practical lesson afforded from being informed as Mr. Andrew Wylie informs us in his letter in the Colonist that there is a yellow house on the Race Course which is a notorious brothel? What benefit can it be to morality or religion to gratify a depraved taste in filthily groping into the details of private life and making a newspaper a weekly reservoir of all the filth that slanderers and scandal-mongers may think proper to fling into it. - Again and again he protested against the alliance of such obscenities and indecencies either with religion or morality. He might well retort the unmerited aspersion of hypocricy [sic] with which his client was charged upon the source from which these precious productions were supposed to emanate. If they were correctly attributed to one whose mission was presumed to be one of peace and charity well indeed might the charge of hypocricy [sic] be against him who so flagrantly violated the instructions of Him who told him "whatsoever things are true whatsoever things are honest whatsoever things are just whatsoever things are pure whatsoever things are lovely whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue and if there be any praise think of these things." Surely such a person did not find a sanction for the course he had chosen in the admonition of the Apostle with whose lesson he ought to be familiar "Brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault ye that are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness considering thyself lest thou also be tempted." But lessons such as these were not congenial to the mind of the slanderer - and therefore a gallery of portraits after the fashion of Mr. Lodge's must be got up for scandal to gloat her haggard eyes upon. Next comes the hollow pretext of her slanderer should such and such a man be eased of the fear of being stigmatized they will not scruple to immerse themselves in vices. This is a fallacious mode of argument. There has been no scarcity of libels of this description and yet we have not heard of mankind being reformed by them. Besides consider how ineffectual this remedy must be from the ill-use that would be made of it in aspersing blindly and indiscriminately all kinds of families. And moreover consider this-- that persecution always begets resistance - whether the cause be a virtuous or a vicious one - it makes a man attached to the cause in which he suffers and tough obscene ribaldry may contribute to deprave a man he could not believe it ever contributed to improve him. Besides slanderers may adhere to truth. Many extensive matters had been pressed into this case - but no attempt was made to prove the truth of any one of the facts and speeches set forth in the obscene poem that had been read to the Jury that day. - Indeed to show the true character of the description of libellers to which The Colonist newspaper belonged he would quote the character from one who practised the art of writing and understood it well. Count De Busy in his Autobiography writes thus: "About five years since not knowing how to amuse myself in the rural recess where I then was I verified the proverb that idleness is the mother of mischief: for I set about writing a history or rather a satirical romance without designing to make an ill use of it but only to employ myself at that time or at most only to divert and to obtain a few praises from them for being a good writer. As true incidents have never enough of the marvellous in them to be very entertaining I had recourse to invention thinking it would please still more and without entertaining the least scruple of the injury I might do the parties concerned I mentioned a thousand particulars which were mere fictions. I made some men happy with ladies who had never been so much as once listened to by them and even others who had never intended to address women in any manner; and because it would have been ridiculous to make choice of no berth and figure for the chief heroines of my romance I pitched upon two who were not wanting in any good quality and were even possessed of so many that envy might contribute to make all the ill things I might say of them credible." This was a faithful picture of the poem that had been read - fiction abounds where facts were wanting and the poet seeks to divert and gain applause reckless of what feelings he might wound  "For to the honour of literature be it said that the libellous Sunday papers are rarely supported by any literary men; they are conducted chiefly by broken down sharpers ci devant markers at gambling-houses and the very worst description of uneducated blackguards. The only way by the bye to check these gentlemen in their career of slander is to be found in the first opportunity of inflicting upon them that personal chastisement which is the perquisite of bullies. - Pooh! you say they are not worthy the punishment. Pardon me they are not worth the denying ourselves the luxury of inflicting it. You should wait but never miss the convenient opportunity. In the spirit of Dr. Johnson's criticism on the Hebrides "they are worth seeing" (said he) "but not worth going to see" these gentlemen are worth kicking but not worth going to kick."  Thus it was. Mr. Wilson did not go to horse-whip Mr. Bull - but Mr. Bull came to Mr. Wilson's to be horsewhipped by him. It took place at Wilson's own door; he had notice of it - and if his object were peace why on his first going out did he not go to the Police-office to exhibit articles of the peace against Mr. Wilson - if his object was peace why did he go to Mr. Wilson's very door to beard and taunt and provoke him to the assault he knew he so well merited? But no! his object was money - and that was pretty clear from his mode of acting as well indeed as from the speech he instructed his Counsel to make to day - for his learned friend very coolly invited the Jury to retire and find by way of verdict - Damages - John Thomas Wilson's show-room - and that too was only to go in part satisfaction of the damages. Money then was the first object of this action and next the object was reformation of morals. If this action succeeded it would be considered as the hoisting of the standard of morals so oft inculcated in the Colonist. Standard of morals indeed! Yes but such a standard as Stockdale attempted to hoist in England when he was prosecuted for the publication of the most infamous and obscene book that had ever been published. On the floor of the Court of King's Bench in England he insulted the Nation by declaring that the work he had published was more calculated to advance the moral interests of England than any book that had been published with the exception of the Holy Volume. And what did the Jury suppose that book was? Why the memoirs of Harriet Wilson - or twenty years of the life of a Harlot - abounding in obscene anecdotes such as are to be met with in the letter of Mr. Andrew Wylie and other articles of the Colonist. It was to be hoped some new emigrant ship would bring out the worthy Stockdale as a co-Editor to the Colonist and with the co-operation of the talents of La belle Harriette it might continue to furnish for many years to come defamatory portraits after the fashion of "Lodge's Portraits." Stockdale would be a worthy compeer for this worthy plaintiff -  "Arcades ambo  Et cantare pares et respondere parati."  The learned Counsel proceeded to advert to the circumstances of the assault which were of a far less aggravated character than they had been represented; for Mr. Wilson instead of rushing rudely up to Mr. Bull's room was politely shown into it by Mr. Kerr. And then as to the assault itself - the worthy and excellent Magistrate who gave evidence of it and he moreover admitted it was calculated greatly to irritate and injure the defendant. The case was now in the hands of the Jury - a tribunal composed of twelve men who would not do injustice to a neighbour knowing that they might themselves tomorrow be the victims of the injustice they inflicted upon their neighbour - for all the fictions and falsehoods contained in the present Poem might at the slanderer's will and pleasure be directed against the most moral and estimable men in society. In truth the plaintiff sought to establish the tyranny of the Press in this and that tyranny next to money was the object of this action.  Gentlemen - said Mr. Therry in conclusion if you bow to this yoke believe me you will find that the "yoke is not sweet" nor the "burden light." If you delegate to a man whose mind is imbued with a gloomy saturnine enthusiasm that drives him along the course he has chosen whether for good or for evil with inexorable firmness if you establish in him the despotism of the Press in this community you will find at no distant day that you have raised up a creature resembling the splendid fiction of a recent romance the hero of which constructs a human form with all the corporeal capabilities of a man but not being able to impart to the work of his hands a perception of right and wrong he discovers too late that he has only created amore than mortal power of doing mischief and himself recoils from the monster which he has made. So too if you raise up a man regardless of the checks and decencies which moderate the world's censure and make the intercourse of mankind urbane and humanized - one from whose scoff religion affords no shelter and from whose slander the grave affords no sanctuary - if you erect such a man into a despot over every family in the land to select for torture his victim as he pleases you will have inflicted a mighty mischief on this community which many generations of time cannot repair and like the fabled hero I have mentioned you will yourselves recoil from the monster you have made.   The Chief Justice charged the Jury reading the evidence and offering such observations as suggested themselves thereon.  The Jury retired for about ten minutes and returned a verdict for the plaintiff Damages £5.  Before the Chief Justice and a Special Jury.  Lyons v. Stephens and Stokes - Mr. Windeyer opened the pleadings. The declaration contained four counts the first charged the defendants with having published a libel of and concerning his conduct as a member of the Patriotic Association; the second charged him with certain conduct at the Public Meeting held on the Race Course; the third and fourth reflected upon his character as an auctioner [sic]. Defendants pleaded the general issue not guilty damages were laid at £2000.  The Attorney General in stating the case to the Jury said he was afraid it would be necessary for him to claim their indulgence if they should consider him tedious in laying the case before them but they would see that if he should be so it was not unnecessarily as it would require more time wish. Mr. S. Stephen who was the leading Counsel on the other side had stated on the evening previous that he would be indisposed this day he did not then see him in his place and was afraid it was rather through an indisposition to undertake the case than through any sickness of the would make as much of defendants' cause as it was possible to make of it. In a case of libel the feelings of the Jury might be worked upon by Counsel their passions excited but such an effect was not desirable it was not absolutely requisite that either Counsel or Attorney should use any extraneous matter. The defendants had had the opportunity if they could of putting a justification on the record and they might have given evidence in support of it. But now having only pleaded the general issue to try it required neither activity nor exertion on the part of the Counsel. Mr. Lyons from the length of time he had been an auctioneer must be known to every one who read a newspaper or had any connexion with public sales. Defendants were the Editors and Proprietors of the Sydney Herald. Before he (the Attorney General) introduced to their notice the libels themselves it was necessary that he should refer them to the position in which Mr. Lyons had stood for some time as an auctioneer through industry activity and perseverance ever zealous in the interest of his employer with a strict punctuality in his payment he had raised himself from comparative obscurity to the possession of a considerable business a business by far the most extensive of any auctioneer in the Colony this they would prove together with the fact that the object of defendants in writing the libels was solely to attack him and to ruin him in his trade. In proportion to the estimation in which he was held they would find the virulence directed against him. They would see that the libels bore internal evidence of the most rancorous malice and if they judged the libel by the standard injury it was calculated to effect they would see that such malice was of the most superlative character. If he (the Attorney General) was to impute to defendants the malice of fiends who did mischief merely for mischiefs sake he might be going too far but if he charged them with malice which if indulged in would loosen all the bonds of society and destroy all confidence between man and man he would be only stating the truth. He would point their attention to the internal evidence of malice which they bore as he went along. The mind of man was sometimes certainly not satisfied of the criminality charged against another because it was staggered to discover any fit cause but he would show them the causes in this instance one of which was that of rancorous political hostility the other of a base low mean and grovelling character. It was because the plaintiff held the high station he did in his business it was an object for them to have his patronage in advertisements and because he did not favour them as they thought proper was the source from whence their rancour sprung. It was well known the Herald had been the advocate of certain political principles and that Mr. Lyons opposed those principles he went against that side which the Herald had taken so far there was no objection every man had a right to support whichever line of politics he thought proper and a right to disseminate his opinions if he chose amongst the community of which he was a member; to this he would not object but it was mixing up private animosity with making them a cloak for private slander dragging forth an individual to be held up to public scorn under the dastardly pretence of advocating a general principle. It was misusing the power of the press that powerful engine for good or for evil as it may be directed. It was employing that for the sole purpose of bringing disgrace and ruin upon an individual they complained of. Mr. Lyons was proud to say that the libels had had no material effect upon him in this colony for within the last quarter his receipts and sales had been increased above any previous quarter since his being in business. That circumstance showed the strong hold he had in the estimation of the public and proved how those employed him valued his character. But not withstanding defendants had not only circulated the se [sic] libels throughout the community here but sought every opportunity of transmitting them to the merchants of England nay the defamation was carried through the medium of the press from pole to pole such being the case could any man withstand it or escape the consequences of being so insidiously calumniated by the venality of the press. There was an inherent repugnance in our nature to forego - to give up prejudices which in early life we had imbibed they clung to us in after life with the most obstinate tenacity. So we find with a man who has once erred although he his willing to make all the reparation in his power yet still a prejudice will exist against him and any man who might have a large estate for sale or a great quantity of goods consigned to him for disposal he would naturally say after having read those libels "although I think he is not guilty of the charges alledged against him yet I may as well go to another;" this might be said by even the most candid portion of the community. But would it not also be said by other in this colony where we are habitually looking at each other as if influenced by sinister motives. When he showed them what the injury might be to plaintiff they would see the amount of damages (£2000) laid in the declaration could be of no consequence for he was clearing from £10000 to £12000 per annum by his business; it would be but a drop in the ocean it was not therefore the money that he sought. The first attack made upon Mr. Lyons was so contemptible it would hardly have been worthy of notice but when he wrote to them after the second appeared they sent for answer "they had only thrown a cap in the crowd and any whom it would fit might wear it if they chose" - at the same time referring him to their solicitor for any further explanation. Mr. Lyons had been libelled for some time previous little petty libels but which were so truly contemptible in their nature that he never minuted them being politically opposed to defendants he supposed such squibs were only meant in good humour and he took them as such but when at length from their continually harping upon him and a circumstance occuring [sic] which induced him to withdraw his advertisements from them then it was that the phrensy [?] of these Editors became so great that they determined to hunt him down and strip him of that trade in which he was embarked. He would trace all through the several papers and clearly show that Mr. Lyons was the only person meant. Mr. Lyons belonged to the class called Emancipists he belonged also to the Patriotic Association and was an active member; he and others were collectors for it. When the defendants honored him with their libels they at the same time libelled Mr. Chief Justice Forbes (he then read a paragraph respecting a recruiting party and continued.) That might be all very funny there certainly was no great harm in it but no one could have a doubt to whom "Sergeant Lyons" was meant to apply as described in the squib. In the same paper was another libel but which certainly was not then before the Court a libel upon Chief Justice Forbes it was however never taken notice of that learned gentleman was above bringing the defendants before the court to answer for an attack upon his character. It would be left to the future historian to show how low the public press had sunk in these our days when it could find pleasure in assailing a character so eminent. (He then read a part of the article which had reference to the meeting on the Race Ground and continued.) There was no mistaking who was meant by the "Political Auctioneer" or doubting that amongst the "Host of transported Jews" Mr. Lyons was included. These articles (he continued) were merely introductory they formed scarcely any part of his case and he introduced them merely to show that Mr. L. was the political auctioneer alluded to and was the only one who had the distinction of being noticed by the Herald paper. (He then read a part of the article headed Auctioneers and Agents and continued.) The article was of very great length and the time perhaps would not be entirely thrown away was he to read it through; but he did not think it necessary to weary them so much. The article had been drawn up with so much care that it would require the exercise of their sagacity to detect all the private slander (so mixed up were they with the pretending public discussion) and to clearly discover how the public matter had been made a cloak to conceal the base detestable motives of the private assassin. The article also threw out insinuations against the agents or merchants of the colony against men whose characters were alone a sufficient answer to the calumny: but this libeller intent upon his game - in order to run down - to crush his victim hesitated not to libel others so that he could carry his into effect his object against the plaintiff. The defendants knew how Mr. Lyons had been upheld by the merchants and by men of every class from governor Darling who reposed confidence in him down to the poorest individual who had property to dispose of by public sale. Not only was the character of plaintiff assailed but the trade of the Colony was stabbed by these libellers for when the British merchant read them would he not pause ere he s  "Who shook the drop with hearty cheers  And told the man of law to hold his jaws."  Indeed the applicability was so palpable that if half the town was summoned they would say it meant the plaintiff. Nay take even a passenger from the street and if he had been but resident in Sydney for twelve months he (the Attorney General) would state his existence that he would say - "Sam Lyons to be sure." If that would be his opinion and if they were satisfied it was him thus meant who had been guilty of such gross conduct under the eyes of the mercantile body of Sydney - men shrewd and penetrating who would immediately have detected him in any such act of swindling such as was described. He had formed they say a joint stock company with the agents of Sydney who were the merchants; for all the latter acted in the capacity of the former also. But in order that defendants could get over the action yet they must convict all the merchants as well as Mr. Lyons. He would ask them (the Jury) if there was ever so monstrous a libel brought before a Jury? And what amount of damages could compensate the plaintiff for a series of libels which would have swept from him an income of nearly £10000 per annum. No damages could compensate that it was the writer's intention he should sustain. True he had now sold his business but he might after that trial resume it or enter upon some other pursuit: but as he had before observed the disgrace was not only entailed upon him but attached also to his children. What sensation those articles might produce in London they could not calculate but they knew here the enquiry was enormous for it affected so many that it became a general inquiry so that the defendants in endeavouring to aim their shafts of calumny against Mr. Lyons they made at the same time a stab upon the mercantile prosperity the Colony then enjoyed. They ought therefore to find for the whole amount of damages laid in the declaration for it they did not acquit Mr. Lyons they would convict the Sydney merchants; and then it would be difficult to contemplate the consequences instead of having the harbour filled with vessels richly laden with various kinds of merchandise from Great Britain and other countries they would have no other shipping except such as brought from Great Britain and other countries they would have no other shipping except such as brought those miserable beings whose wretched lot had forced upon them their shores. They (the Jury) however would he was confident mark their sense of such audacity which would seek to effect a general ruin; and it was no matter what may be a man's wealth rob him of his good name and he is poor indeed! Defendants' paper had the greatest circulation of any in the Colony and they knew that plaintiff could bring action after action against them yet still continued the attacks up to the last publication when they saw that they could not but conclude that there was some person behind the curtain who formed a stock purse for the defence otherwise it would be difficult to believe they should thus fix their sting at the risk of all they had.  Mr. Newcomb clerk in the Colonial Secretary's Office proved that the two defendants Messrs. Stephens and Stokes were the proprietors and editors of the Herald and produced office copies of those numbers in which the libels were published.  Mr. John Purkis a clerk to Mr. Lyons proved the difference with the Herald in respect to an advertisement and also that Mr. L. invariably used W for V.  Mr. Gurner produced plaintiff's free pardon.  Dr. Bland proved the applicability of the libel to plaintiff Messrs. E. S. Hall Edye Manning and - Keith established the same fact.  The libels were then put in and read by the clerk.  Mr. S. Stephen then rose after claiming the jury's indulgence on account of indisposition he said he thought that after the opening speech of the Attorney General they (the jury) could have very little doubt that in this case at least there was hardly any prospect of plaintiff obtaining a verdict; for the Attorney General had alledged [sic] after having read the various articles that he (the plaintiff) had not been greatly injured had not been brought into public scandal and disgrace or that he had suffered damage in any way whatever as stated in the declaration no doubt then as he had suffered no damages this action had been brought to annoy the defendants and at the same time perhaps to connect his (Mr. Lyons) name with that eminent man Mr. Chief Justice Forbes or to make a display of the large amount of business he had transacted during the last few years if so then his object had been gratified; plaintiff they had been told was a man of large capital but he (Mr. S.) knew that if by spending £2000 he could make the defendants spend the same sum he would not hesitate to throw it into the ocean pound by pound if he could ruin the defendants by compelling them to pay in proportion; he had imagined by consulting so many counsel that they would as libel hunters find out something which would fix upon the defendants he had retained them long before the action was commenced thinking no doubt he had retained the whole bar; he certainly had retained the most talented for he (Mr. S.) could not pretend to compete with them he could not say why the unnecessary haste should have been had recourse to seeing that the jury which had been agreed to by mutual consent was not in attendance; it had even that day been pressed on a day which ought to have been set aside for banco business.  The Chief Justice interrupted and said that day had been fixed for the trial by consent of the bar.  Mr. S. Stephen said he had not agreed to it but the case was then before the Court and he trusted that notwithstanding all these disadvantages under which he and his colleague labored the ingenuity with which the case on the other had been managed the bringing in even the name of the Chief Justice let the Jury endeavour to see if there was any thing which entitled him to damages. If the remarks which had been read from the paper were such as to call forth observations from the learned Judge how could the plaintiff so unnecessarily introduce them upon the records of that Court? Did that circumstance shew any desire to protect the Chief Justice from being thus brought before the public? Who had extended the publication of these libels as they are called? Why the plaintiff and his counsel. Why did they do so? It was done to create a prejudice against the defendants. They thought there might be some amongst the twelve jurymen so much attached to the Chief Justice that they would rush right or wrong to give a verdict against them. What did plaintiff mean by introducing the name of Mr. Forbes and of this being called his convict friend was it to shew that he had been aspersed? Was he libelled by that? Was he anxious to escape any ridicule by explaining that he was not the friend of that gentleman? It could not be for his vindication for when the time may come if ever such a time should come when the Chief Justice may think it proper to vindicate himself from any thing which may have been said of him in the papers he will not heed plaintiff's assistance. With respect to the article which alluded to the hustings a "drop" he (Mr. S.) was himself upon the drop and when he read the squib he thought the meeting was fairly ridiculed he himself might have laughed at others; the matter was a fair subject for ridicule the article nothing more than a mere political squib. Why does a public writer undertake his office if he is not to laugh at that which is ridiculous to praise that which is praiseworthy and condemn that which he conceives injurious or bad. If an Editor was not allowed to do that the sooner the public look out for their own information the better. But Mr. Lyons was a public character and were not all public characters fair subjects of criticism? How was he to have his principles known if he was not liable to have his conduct and opinions canvassed? It had been shown that he was a very active member of the Patriotic Association he was a political character. Was there any harm in that? Did he object to being called a political character? Was there any thing wrong to be found in the article headed the "Recruiting Party!" There was enough however in it to call forth the ire of Mr. L. he was styled merely Serg. Lyons a rank not sufficiently high for him so that when the next article appeared he determined upon punishing the defendants if either his Attorney or any of his four Counsel could that it contained any thing libellous. He (Mr. S.) would ask the Jury when he had read the article headed "Auctioneers and Agents." whether it was not a fair and honest expression of opinion upon an evil which was then in existence throughout the Colony? He would ask them to bear in mind whether there was not a certain line of reasoning throughout which plainly proved it was a bona fide statement of what was in existence? And that the mode defendants took was the best adapted for putting it down? They were aware that the Herald had been advocating the anti-convict principle whilst some other journals the Sydney Gazette for instance when under the management of Watt advocated convict principles which meant the extending indulgences to all those who came out as it was termed under unfortunate circumstances. Every one amongst them at first coming to the Colony was no doubt astonished when he first heard the terms "prisoners of the Crown" and "assigned servants" for his own part he for a time considered that the former were some unfortunate beings whom the Crown had made or taken prisoners in the course of war and that the latter were merely apprentices but when he became acquainted with the real meaning of the term then he adopted the same phraseology and would now no more think of calling an individual a convict then he would think of calling any other person by their proper name. The Herald however was determined that they should be called by their right names and thus it was they set themselves against what they termed convict principles. They contended therefore that they were certain individuals who sought to gain an influence endeavouring to extend those convict principles. Auctioneers for instance who had a great number of advertisements sent them to papers that advocated convict principles the papers in return forwarded their views. But the Herald would not do so and they argued that all respectable merchants ought to be made acquainted with the manner in which such influence was exercised. Plaintiff it appeared was a very prominent character in getting signatures both for the Patriotic Petition and to the Address. Did it not shew therefore that by doing all this he did it to extend his own influence and did it not enable him to extend the influence of his class? Thus they would see that the course adopted by defendants was a fair and legitimate mode of reasoning. Or Why was the name of the Chief Justice? Why was "Convict Friends" introduced? Why merely to shew that Mr. Lyons possessed certain influence through the means pointed out. Thus it shows that with the first article although it did not make for the plaintiff how imprudent it was for him to have put it on the record. How could the Chief Justice have been introduced except in the way he had stated? He would ask them (the Jury) to exercise their calm and sound judgment and say whether the articles had been written with any other motive than to expose a system of convict influence in this Colony? They knew that in all speeches - all sermons - all books there was something said by way of introduction which had reference to the body of the work. The introductory article in this case showed the object that was to be attained. (He then went into a close examination of the various articles commenting upon each material part and continued.) He would then ask the Jury whether there was any libel upon Mr. Lyons and the merchants or whether it was not a fair criticism upon the business of the former and other auctioneers in general? The Attorney General had expressed himself as being very glad in finding the Jury composed of so many respectable merchants and to say that they were all slandered he knew would produce an effect for the same purpose that the name of the Chief Justice had been introduced viz. to produce a prejudice against the defendants. But he (Mr. S.) strongly suspected the Attorney General would find out that he was mistaken for whether merchants might have been misled or not by the auctioneering system he would find that when they went into the Jury box they could not allow their feelings to lead them from their duty - to act otherwise than their oaths would dictate. He would then beg to inform them of the several points they would have to consider. The first was were those articles written of and concerning Mr. Lyons? Next if they were libellous and tended to injury him in his business? But it appeared he had parted with his business having previously succeeded to his heart's content. He would ask them therefore whether that part which related to Mr. Lyons only was false? and being false whether it was calculated to injure him? And lastly whether it was malicious? For although it might have had a tendency to injure him they must be satisfied that it was also malicious. But supposing the marks to be true then was it not a fair comment upon the system? Mr. Lyons had boasted of his public notoriety that was the means by which he lived the more he was known the more business he had. The evil elluded [sic] to Mr. Hall said "he knew what existed in plaintiff's rooms as well as in others it was a matter of such general report he could not doubt its accuracy." Mr. Manning had said that "stolen goods were sold at such rooms frequently." But it was not a fair way of judging of the articles merely to put two or three persons into the box and ask their opinion upon detached sentences they have been allowed to weigh and deliberate upon the whole of them; it had been proved that these evils did exist then was it not right to suppose that these articles were written to put down a bad system which was injurious to the general trade. The other side said that certain parts alluded to Mr. Lyons because he was a political auctioneer his being so did not make the article libellous; it was not accusing him of any thing personal. Under these circumstances he would hope and trust that they would be of opinion when the articles were fairly considered in detail not as read by the Clerk of the Court but read and commented upon as he (Mr. S.) had done that they were only a fair criticism upon a system. If the evil did exist were the comments fair upon the system? If not were they libellous? Then with regard to Chief Justice Forbes whose name had been introduced in the case he knew it had been introduced for the purpose of creating a prejudice he would shew that it was the key stone upon which the article was raised. He knew that many of the jury might be friendly to the Chief Justice - many of them might be acquainted with Mr. Lyons but if the former had been ridiculed his character stood too high to be injured by such an such an article. But had there not been a difference of opinion upon even greater men than Mr. Forbes? Even Aristides the most just of all just men was banished his country in consequence of a difference in opinion - some might think highly of Chief Justice Forbes others might think nearl  The Chief Justice in charging the jury observed that before he presented to them the various points it would be necessary for them to consider it was essential that he should warn them against being influenced by any thing they might have seen or heard respecting the case out of Court. It has been said that many articles had been published in the Herald newspaper respecting the emigrants in this Colony. He was bound to consider that all of them (the jury) were either persons who had come free or had been born in the Colony but they were to dismiss all private feelings from their minds and every thing which they might have heard out of doors. If they were capable of being influenced by any thing which did not appear in evidence that day they were unfit to sit in the jury box. The plaintiff in the very outset of his case avowed that he came to the Colony a transport but that he is now a free subject having received his Majesty's free pardon. Although it might be a very unusual thing for such a man to go into a Court at home to seek reparation for an injury done to his character yet in this colony he had a clear right to come into the Supreme Court and ask compensation if by any one he had been wontonly [sic] injured. He might have come to the Colony a prisoner but his subsequent conduct may have been quite reformed and in that case he had as good a right to come there for protection as any other person. If the defendants really did write the articles with the view they alledge [sic] viz. to put down a bad and injurious system they deserved the thanks of the community; if such a system was being carried on by the auctioneers and their object was to expose it they were deserving the warmest praise of the public. All the judges in this Colony come here with all those honest prejudices in favor of a free press which are entertained at home; if a man be an honest man he never need be afraid of his conduct being discussed and therefore has nothing to fear from the influence of the press when fairly and honestly exercised (he then read over to the jury the whole of the evidence commenting as he went along upon such parts as bore strongly upon the case and continued) they (the jury) were not bound by what the witnesses had sworn as to the import of the libel for after all they were the judges whether or not the matter was libellous. They had heard a very powerful address from Mr. Steahen although he appeared to be laboring under indisposition it had not prevented him from putting every point before them that zeal for his clients could suggest. He would tell them (the jury) that if there was no other object in view than to put down that improper system which was proved to him to have existed; if their honest purpose was to put that down which was working an injury to the trade here and the merchants at home if the object really was to put down the system then they ought to give the defendants the benefit of that opinion; but as the Attorney General had emphatically enquired - was the object in view to put down the system or to put down the man? did they think that under the pretext of putting down the system defendants had sought to injure the man either through political vengeance or because he took his advertisements from them; the comments made even to put down the system ought to have been made fairly and candidly; did the articles apply to Mr. Lyons? for if they did not then the whole fabric of the action fell to the ground. If they did apply to him imputing to him corrupt motives and upholding the mischievous doctrines of the Convict class were they written to put down the man; were they intended as an individual attack to bring about his ruination. If the system had existed for a long time how did it happen that those articles were not written until he had withdrawn his advertisements; if they were satisfied of that then that showed the animus; it showed the writers had in view; If they were satisfied of that then it became their duty to give such ample damages as would satisfy the justice of the case; the press was a powerful engine to be used only for good and legitimate purposes not for injury and oppression; the jury in this case were the judges whether the articles were libellous or not; but if the writers would step out of their way to unjustly attack others they must take the consequences; on the other hand honest integrity virtue and purity would he was sure always be upheld by a jury of the country. The case was then in their (the jury's) hands they would as honest men apply their minds to the whole case read carefully over the various articles and say as reasonable reflecting men whether it was merely an attack upon the system or that the object was to put down the man? The case was in their hands and they would give such a verdict as would satisfy their own consciences and meet the justice of the case.  The Jury then retired and after an an [sic] absence of nearly an hour returned with a verdict for the plaintiff damages £200.  His Honor then certified that it was a fit case for a special jury and three counsel.  Counsel for Plaintiff - The Attorney General with Messrs. Therry Foster and Windeyer Jun For the Defendants Messrs Stephen and Kerr. The trial lasted from ten o'clock in the morning until eight at night.  Exparte Lyons - Mr. Attorney-General moved that the rule obtained in his case be made absolute.  Mr. Kerr hoped that the case would not be called on immediately as through the illness of Mr. Francis Stephen he had only just received his brief and had not time to study it. Under these circumstances he thought it might be postponed for a week. He could not tell why it should be brought on to-day.  The Attorney-General - It is because the defendant are continually blackguarding Mr. Lyons if I may make use of such a vulgar expression in their journal. The case is set down for trial on the 17th instant and it is evidently the object of the parties to put off the hearing of the argument in support of this rule until after the trial when you hope the articles will have the intended effect. The present (continued the learned gentleman) is such a case that if Mr. Lyons had not interfered in the matter the Authorities either the Attorney-General or the Court must have interfered. Every man who has a case in that Court has a right to the protection of the Court; and if such articles were allowed a person might as well fight with a highwayman with a pistol. Mr. Lyons had no wish to press the case for the purpose of harassing the defendants; but after such an article as appeared in the last Herald he was not called on to exercise any delicacy. He would again assert that if Mr. Lyons had not moved in the present case the Attorney-General would have officially moved the Court for leave to file an information.  Judge Burton - You must have filed an ex officio Mr. Attorney.  Attorney-General - Your Honors could punish them for contempt.  Mr. Sydney Stephen could not see that making the rule absolute would be of any avail unless they wanted to make use of it on the forthcoming trial.  Mr. Kerr then moved that the case be postponed to Saturday next Counsel not having had sufficient time to study their briefs. Mr. K. read Mr. Francis Stephen's affidavit in support of his motion which stated that in consequence of an attack of illness on the previous day he had been prevented from delivering briefs to Counsels until that morning.  Judge Dowling - the case is down for trial on Tuesday and therefore there cannot be much more damage done; and if any more libels are published they will be the subject of another action.  Attorney-General - Your Honor it is the obstruction of justice we complain of.  Judge Dowling hoped there was sufficient integrity in twelve impartial Jurors to withstand the tone and tenor of any article.  Judge Burton - What effect will leaving the rule until after the trial have? - the injury if any is already done.  The Attorney-General read the joint affidavit of Mr. Want and Mr. Lyons which stated that Mr. Francis Stephen was in Court the whole of the previous day. The cases had been postponed from the Saturday before and the Counsel ought to have had their briefs on that day. Mr. Stephen had been in Court on Friday and if he was taken ill in the afternoon his briefs ought to have delivered before that.  After a deal of desultory conversation Judge Dowling said that dealing with the materials now before them on affidavit the Court was compelled to decide that the case must be proceeded with.  Mr. Sydney Stephen then addressed the Court against the rule. The first objection he would take was that the rule nisi had been obtained irregularly inasmuch as there was not sufficient proof of publication. The mere swearing that paper was purchased at the shop of the defendants although it might do for a civil case was not sufficient for a criminal proceeding. It might have been sold by a clerk which in a civil case would be sufficient to render the principals liable but in a criminal case it was certainly necessary that the affidavit should state it was sold by one of the defendants. The affidavit of Lyons he contended did not shew sufficient grounds to warrant the granting of the rule; it stated that the article was calculated to have an effect on the class from whom the Special Jurors are chosen not on the Jury itself but on the class from whence they are chosen. The affidavit did not state that any facts of the case were shewn but merely that there were some general remarks made respecting Mr. Lyons' character; this was certainly far too vague to grant a criminal information on. If a garbled statement or any falsehoods had been published respecting the case it might then have been fairly said to have been an attempt to obstruct the course of justice which in the present case he apprehended it was not. Mr. Lyons denied that he brought the action to take money out of the pockets of the defendants; now he had engaged four counsel to conduct his case leaving the other side only two. Of course they had chosen the four whom they considered to have the most talent. No doubt Mr. L. had been told by his legal advisers that he would get a verdict and if it was only one farthing the defendants would be put to the expense of paying the four counsel; and he would ask whether that did not clearly shew that he did wish to take money of out of his client's pockets? The next paragraph of Mr. Lyons' affidavit denied that he had any hostility to the defendant because they advocated political principles oppose to his own. If he had any hostility to the defendants on political grounds he would ask what crime it would be and it would be no libel to say he had; it certainly could not obstruct the course of justice to state it. As to Mr. Lyons' construction of certain portions of the article he held it as nothing Mr. L. could neither read nor write and would of course swear to any affidavit on the subject that was drawn up for him. The influence of Mr. Lyons' purse was well known and in the present case he had shewn it by retaining four counsel; he was aware it was optional and that he might have retained all the bar if he pleased.  Judge Burton. - Had application been made to the Court we would have restricted him to two counsel until the other side had retained two.  Judge Dowling. - It is a perfect obstruction of justice but we could do nothing unless applied to.  Mr. Sydney Stephen was not aware that their Honors would interfere; he had refused a retainer which had been sent to him by Mr. Bartie because he understood he had already engaged three Counsel and the opposite party having died before the case came on he had received no retainer.  Judge Dowling considered that Mr. Stephen deserve the thanks of the community for the manner in which he had acted.  Mr. Stephen continued. - He was quite aware that the defendants in the present case would not have employed him if they could have helped it; he knew by their writings that they had a very low opinion of his abilities.  Judge Dowling said that if either of the defendants were present and heard him that day they would certainly alter their minds. Mr. S. then argued at considerable length to shew that the article now complained of was no more than a reiteration of the former articles and that if they did not tend to obstruct the course of justice the present article did not. The learned gentleman concluded by asking whether the defendants because they happened to be editors of a newspaper were to deny to themselves that justice they would have done to any other person? Would the article have been considered an obstruction of justice if the editors had not been parties to the action? if it would not then he contended that their being parties would not make it so and if it would then he considered it was a palliation.  Mr. Kerr briefly followed on the same side.  The Attorney-General addressed the Court at considerable length in support of the rule; but as the learned gentleman said nothing important on the subject that has not been said before we do not think it necessary to follow him through his speech. With respect to Mr. Lyons having retained four Counsels he contended that as Mr. Therry was out of town and he (the Atty Gen.) might be called away by his official duties he had in fact only retained two.  After a few minutes consideration Judge Dowling said that he thought the publication was sufficiently proved to authorise the Court in making the rule absolute. They did not feel called on to enter into their reasons which had guided them; it would be sufficient to state that it was their impression that the obvious talent of the article is to prejudice the trial of the case. - Rule Absolute.  Dowling A.C.J 12 August 1837  Saturday August 12. - Before the Acting Chief Justice and a Military Jury composed of the following Gentlemen:- Major Messeter Captain Fyans Captain Fothergill Lieutenant Kennedy Lieutenant Cheveraux Ensign Knowles and Ensign Campbell.  Ward Stephens Esq appeared on information filed at the instance of Samuel Lyons of Sydney charging him with endeavouring to pervert the ends of justice F. M. Stokes Esq formerly joint editor of the Sydney Herald was also included in the information but as he is out of the Colony the trial was proceeded with in his absence. The information alleged that long before the 26th day of September 1836 it was currently reported that one Watt was virtual editor of the Sydney Gazette newspaper; and also that he was the author of a pamphlet written under the signature of "Humanitas;" and also that an action had been commenced by Samuel Lyons against the defendants for publishing a libel in the Sydney Herald newspaper imputing to the said Samuel Lyons disgraceful improper and dishonest conduct in his trade or business of an auctioneer which action was about to come on for trial; and that the defendants knowing the premises and being persons of wicked and depraved minds and wishing to pervert the ends of justice and to prevent the said Samuel Lyons from having a fair trial by prejudicing the minds of the jury with force and arms at Sydney on the 26th day of September 1836 did publish a certain false slanderous and malicious libel of the said Samuel Lyons. (The information set forth the whole of the article under the head "Auctioneers and Agents" which appeared in the Sydney Herald of the 26th September last but which is too long to insert. The following are a few of the extracts more particularly relied upon:-  "Our readers will remember that some time ago we published a series of articles on the conduct of certain Auctioneers and Agents in this Colony which were transmitted to us by a writer who appeared to have enjoyed opportunities of making himself pretty well acquainted with the subject which he undertook to bring under the notice of the public. In publishing those articles we professed at the time and have since more than once stated the same fact that we were influenced solely by a desire to expose a corrupt system; and that to assail `individuals' was not our object - we were too `prudent' to be thus caught."  "Now courteous or gentle reader (or more properly courteous and gentle reader; for supposing as we do that you are a subscriber to the Herald we take it for granted that you are gentle as well as courteous) who do you think has saddled himself with all the enormities which we have pointed out as practised under the New South Wales "Auctioneering system"? who but - Mr. Samuel Lyons! Yes! let there be no mistake about the matter - Mr. Samuel Lyons and his lawyer (Mr. Unwin) `of course' say that there can be no avoiding the conclusion that Mr. L and none other is the hero of the historical fragments which we have published under the title of "Auctioneers and Agents!! Mr. Samuel Lyons therefore took immediate steps to clear up his `character' in public estimation; and accordingly the public will be gratified at witnessing the aforesaid character put in issue in all probability during the present sitting of the Supreme Court.  "We repeat therefore that Mr. Lyons's known attachment to certain principles and parties and his avowed dislike of those who are opposed to either on public grounds leave no doubt on our minds that he availed himself of the opportunity of fancying himself the object of attack for the sole purpose of putting us to the trouble and expense of defending an action at law. The very first step which this man took in the matter showed the bent of his mind and the motives by which he was actuated; for even before we had the slightest reason to suppose that it was his intention to institute proceedings against us he had already retained no less than `four' of the leading counsel at the bar - evidently intending thereby to deprive us of professional assistance seeing that the number of barristers is at present so few. We beg respectfully to call the attention of the Court to this fact. Here is a common action for alleged libel; and the plaintiff because he is able to draw upon his purse for the gratification of his bad feelings retains nearly the whole strength of the bar for no other purpose whatsoever but because he thinks it will embarrass the defendants. We do entreat of the Court to notice this fact. What does Mr. Lyons want with four counsel in a trumpery case such as that which he has thus "got up" for the sole purpose of taking money out of our pockets by forcing us to defend it.  We have often deprecated the practice of making a public journal the medium of discussing the private affairs of the editor but we contend that this proceeding of Mr. Samuel Lyons against us is `not' a private affair. It is a direct attack upon the political principles of this journal by an individual to whom those principles are bitter because they tend to up-hold the respectability of the colony and to defend the emigrant colonists from being trod upon by an adverse party: and it is therefore an indirect attack also upon all reputable emigrants the Herald being their organ."  We ask the respectable emigrant colonists whether the colleague of Mr. William Watt in the production of the notorious pamphlet called "Humanitas" could have any sympathy with men who had the misfortune to come free to the colony; or entertain other than feelings of opposition towards public journalists who stood forth in their behalf and held up their slanderers to public contempt? And if we show that Mr. Samuel Lyons was the colleague of that reputable person Mr. William Watt in the production of the "elegant extracts" which we shall presently lay before our readers we ask any man whether our assertion that his prosecution of this journal has originated in motives of a political nature - particularly when we are in a condition to prove that he has also resorted to other means for the purpose of effecting an object so desirable to him as that of injuring the Herald - is not fully borne out by the facts? The publication called `Humanitas' having owing to some after `apprehensions' been circulated only among a select few the following extracts will be new to our readers. Let them peruse and mark the feelings with which these worthies seem disposed to view the emigrant colonists - let them read these bearing in mind that a book of the character of which they are only a mild sample was intended for circulation through the world that a convict was employed to write it - and that Mr. Lyons was its foster-father let them bear this in mind and then think of this person's sensitiveness as to `character!' and of his retaining not less than four counsel to vindicate it! - Mark!"  After Mr. Raymond had opened the case Mr. Therry addressed the jury for the prosecution. He said that after hearing the information read the case was so clear that he might safely leave the paper in the hands of the jury and say nothing to them were it not necessary to state some of the circumstances which led to the publication and which were not before the jury. Before he came into Court he had expected to have addressed a Special Jury and he certainly did think that a jury of merchants and fellow citizens of the parties would have been the proper tribunal to try the case; and he did not consider that the defendant had acted fairly towards the jury by calling them on at the last stage of a long pending litigation of the previous stages of which they were entirely ignorant; but whatever confidence the defendants had in a Military Jury it could not exceed the confidence he (Mr. T.) had. As many of the jurors were new comers it was necessary that he should call their attention to the circumstances under which the article was published. A series of articles had been published in the Sydney Herald under the title of "Auctioneers and Agents" and of these articles Mr. Lyons complained as reflecting upon him in his capacity of an auctioneer by which he got his bread; and in fact had made a large fortune and retired from business with the good opinion of his fellow citizens. During the term that this action was to be tried and pending the action the article now complained of was published; and with the leave of the Court a criminal information was filed by the Attorney General. The result of the action however was that Lyons obtained a verdict for £200. He came into Court averring that he had been a Convict but threw himself back on his twenty years good character. With the character which he had maintained he felt bitterly and justly the attacks of the press especially of a powerful press like the Herald: and his fellow citizens felt that he had a right to complain for they awarded him £200 damages. A few days before the trial came on the article for which the defendants were now on their trial appeared and it would be for the jury to say whether the article was not intended by the defendants to vindicate themselves and impugn the plaintiff; for if it was he would appeal to the Court whether it was not a libel. There was a case in the 2nd of Atkins were it was held that printing a brief was prejudicing the public with regard to the case; and if printing a brief was illegal how much more so was it to publish comments in a paper like the Herald which boasts and he believed justly of having the most extensive circulation of any paper in the Colony and calls itself the organ of the respectable Colonists. In Fourth Term Reports there was a case where a defendant in a case posted bills vindicating himself about an assize town on the eve of a trial; and on the Court being made acquainted with the fact the trial was postponed and the Court above granted a criminal information. On that occasion Lord Kenyon said (the substance of the quotation was that it was highly unconstitutional for a party to a suit to endeavour to prejudice the public mind while a suit was pending.) The Editors of the Herald however think differently from this; they say "we have a press at our command and we contend we have a right to make fair remarks on a case pendete lite;" that is to say "other people must be content with judges and jurors but we a press at our command and we will overawe all; we will prepare the public mind for the case." He called their particular attention to the manner wherein the article which formed the subject of this prosecution was worded. It professed to express surprise that Lyons should have supposed that he was alone intended when it was apparent that it was the well-known system of managing auction sales which the writer denounced. But when the jury came to the consideration of the whole of this publication they would see that so shallow a pretext could not avail the defendants. Throughout the whole series of articles the real object was to attack the character of the plaintiff; though that object like the pipes of an organ were concealed - the gilded counterfeits only being exposed to view. Like those counterfeits the pretence of attacking a vicious system was put forth while the libel itself emanated from a desire to libel the plaintiff as the notes of the organ issued from the hidden pipes. Could any ordinary reader doubt that the object was to libel Lyons and by that means prejudice the case. He did not care what obloquy it might bring on him but he (Mr. T.) would always avow that he should be glad to see the emancipist reform and regenerate and become an useful member of society as Mr. Lyons had done; and in proportion to the depth from which they rose was the credit due to them for rising. He wished to see the line between the good emigrant and the good emancipist as faint as possible while the line between the good emigrant and emancipist and the bad emigrant and emancipist should be as broad and distinct as it could be made. Mr. Lyons had obtained the King's pardon; he was the object of the King's mercy and it was not loyal to attack him in the way he had been attacked; it was in fact attacking the fountain of mercy to make the object of it the subject of vituperative attacks. (The learned Gentleman went through the article paragraph by paragraph endeavouring to shew that it was impossible it could have been written for any other purpose than to prejudice the minds of the public and more especially those from whom the Special Jury was likely to be chosen.) The writer after these three or four columns of attack upon Mr. Lyons says "we have often deprecated the practice of making a public journal the medium of discussing the private affairs of the editor." This put him exceedingly in mind of a chapter of Tom Paine's writing where he concludes a long attack upon the Kingly power by saying "God save the King." The learned Gentleman concluded by observing that the power of the press was so tremendous in England that it had been christened the "Fourth Estate;" but if it was powerful there it was more so in a thinly inhabited Colony like this. So powerful was the press that a writer on nautical science who was to describe the hull rigging and sails of a ship and to say nothing abut steam would not shew more ignorance than a writer on the constitution who was to describe the function of the King Lords and Commons and say nothing about the press; for the press is as powerful and important in the view of government as steam is in navigation.  The following witnesses were then called:-  Mr. William Charles Greville clerk in the office of the Colonial Secretary proved the publication of the Sydney Herald of the 26th September 1836 by the defendants.  Mr. John Purkess clerk to Mr. Lyons. - I recollect purchasing a paper of the 26th September last at the Sydney Herald Office - (paper produced) - this is the paper I purchased.  Cross-examined. - Mr. Lyons intended to retire from business and his intention was well known. Mr. Lyons was a member of the Patriotic Association; I do not know whether he spoke at their meetings but I know he was an active member and subscribed £50 to it.  John Gurner Esq chief clerk in the Supreme Court Office proved that at the time the article was published there was an action of libel pending between Mr. Lyons and the defendants which was tried before the Acting Chief Justice and a special jury and a verdict returned for the plaintiff damages £200. (The declaration being handed in was read by the Clerk of Arraigns.)  Mr. Newcombe clerk in the office of the Colonial Secretary proved the signature of the defendants to the affidavit of proprietorship of the Sydney Herald.  Mr. R. J. Want Attorney. - It was at one time generally reported that a man named Watt was Editor of the Sydney Gazette; Mr. Lyons who was plaintiff in the action of Lyons v. Stephens & Stokes is the Mr. Lyons alluded to in the article now before the Court; the defendants are the same parties.  Cross-examined. - It was reported that Watt was transported here and so was Mr. Lyons; I do not believe that Mr. Lyons has been flogged within ten years; he was struck off the jury list on that ground but was re admitted on proving that he had not been in this country; I have seen him serving as a common juror. I do not recollect seeing an emancipist on the special jury list - I will not say there are none:  This was the case for the prosecution.  Mr. Windeyer for the defendants after a few introductory remarks said that in this case the jury were judges not only of the fact but of the law of the case. His Honor would tell them the law and it would be for them to judge from the law as laid down and the facts that were proved whether the defendants were guilty or not. In the case of the Editor of the Brighton Gazette who published some remarks while a Coroner's inquest was sitting on the body of a person killed by the military Lord Ellenborough said that if there were no bad motives although it might be illegal the case should not go before the jury and the consequence was that although the criminal information was granted the matter was never brought to trial. The fact of the Court having granted a criminal information went for nothing; for in the very case cited by Mr. Therry a few lines above the sentence he had quoted Lord Kenyon says we are not called on now to determine whether the defendant is guilty or not but whether he shall go to trial. The real question for the jury was what the intention of the party and to ascertain that they must judge from the whole article not from the portions which had been picked out by the learned counsel on the other side. If the defendants had not published this article they would have had a statement made at the trial that they had not even had the grace to make an apology. The fact was that as was stated in the articles now complained of the series of articles headed "Auctioneers and Agents" was not written by either of the defendants but was forwarded to them by a person who had had good opportunities of watching the system they exposed; but as the defendants published them in their paper and had the benefit of them it was quite immaterial to a plaintiff seeking fro damages for injuries to his character resulting from those articles what their intention was. Whatever was the intention of the publishers of those articles the law said that they must stand by the consequences. The jury having returned a verdict for Mr. Lyons for £200 had nothing to do with the present case; they did not say the defendants intended to libel Mr. Lyons but that the writer of the articles aimed at him as a Convict Jew and a felon: the intent of the defendants had nothing to do with the matter in that case. If the intent of the defendants was not at issue and in fact had nothing to do with it then how could the defendants be accused of endeavouring to pervert the needs of justice by disclaiming any intent? It was impossible the intent of the defendants could have anything to do with it; had they been up the country or lying in a bed of sickness they must equally have suffered for the articles. The article now complained of was only one of a series of hundreds of articles against Lyons and others who made themselves prominent in politics. The Editors say "the principles upheld by you and the other associates of the man Watt tend to relax the discipline of the Convicts and injure the free Colonists and therefore we will expose you." If the Jury could find that the article now before them was published "with intent to pervert the course of justice" because the publishers declared they did not attack Mr. Lyons individually in the articles on the Auctioneering System there was no production however innocent that could not be charged with a criminal intent. If there was a sentence in the course of the article that the jury considered related to the trial that was then pending they must look at it in conjunction with the whole article. Even Falstaff's bill by looking only at the ha'porth of bread and excluding the long list of charges for sack! sack!! sack!!! might be charged to have have [sic] been incurred "with intent to distress the bread-basket." But they must look at the whole bill and see whether it was not run up for purposes of joviality good fellowship or any thing else more consistent with the character of Falstaff. So here they would look to the whole of this article and say whether it was not more consistent with the character of the newspaper to impute to it a political object instead of an attempt to pervert the course of justice. Indeed it was only by altering its language by substituting "jurors" for "readers" and such like ingenious devices that even Mr. Therry had been able to make out the criminal intent to his own satisfaction. This might do for the purpose of making a parallel to Goldsmith's History of the attempt to prove Noah and Foe to be the same personage but would not suffice to warrant the Jury in finding the defendants guilty. To prove the intent of the defendants the other side might have read every article in the paper relating to Lyons from the day it was published until to-day and then the jury would have been able to say whether the attacks on Mr. Lyons were not intended as a political attacks. The jury came to their verdict of £200 on a series of articles in one of which Corporal Lyons was expressly named; and as Corporal Lyon was a political auctioneer and a convicted jew they found (without regard to the intention of the publishers) that the writer had the prosecutor in his mind and therefore the defendants must pay. If the Jury discharged the defendants Lyons could bring a civil action; but because this particular article happened to be published a month before the trial it is pounced on for a criminal information and declared to be an endeavour to pervert the ends of justice. The jury would have to judge whether it was a necessary consequence that in publishing the article the defendants intended to pervert the ends of justice. Now it would be ridiculous to suppose for a moment that the article would be read by persons of their politics only; it would be read by the public; would be read by their adversaries and what was the fact? Why that the jury who it was assumed might be prejudiced found for the plaintiff damages £200. The jury were now judges of the law and fact. The judges in former times had gradually narrowed the powers of juries on this head to such a degree that an Act of Parliament declaring what was the law was obliged to be passed; and that law declared that juries were judges both of the law and the fact in cases of libel. Lawyers by a long course of education strained themselves to look one way; and where the public might think that certain words had certain meanings lawyers and judges interpreted them as bearing a different meaning. There was a recent case where a miller promised to deliver a certain quantity of flour to a gentleman by a certain day or forfeit £500; and when he made default the lawyers told him he must pay as many thousands which the other party would have made had the flour been delivered. It was no use for the party to say "I meant to pay the £500 only;" the lawyers said "we" put a certain meaning on these words and you must pay what the other would have gained. This it was that induced him to urge upon the jury to bear in mind that whatever might fall from the Court they and they alone were the judges of whether the defendants had been guilty of a criminal act. There was one fact which he had almost forgotten to mention - the article had been published nearly twelve months ago and why if the prosecutor had any confidence in his case did he not bring it forward before? - the defendants were certainly not indebted to his mercy. - Perhaps he was provoked to prosecute them by the articles that had been published since - for many had been published and no doubt many more would be published. After some further remarks the learned gentleman apologised to the Jury for having so long trespassed on their attention; but he found it necessary to extend his observations in order to place before them all the circumstances - the whole series of acts out of which this prosecution arose in order that they might clearly understand the real issue they had to try. The article complained of was (of which the Jury would be satisfied when they came to consider the whole of it) he contended only one of a series of attacks on Lyons's character as a Colonial politician. To contend that it was published for the purpose of perverting the ends of justice on the trial of the former action was to contend for an impossibility; it was of no avail for the defendants to deny their intent to libel Lyons in the former articles. The intent formed no part of that case and therefore the Jury must throw the former trial out of their consideration - and looking at the publication before the Court by itself and as a whole (for they were not to confine themselves to the paragraphs picked out on the other side) say whether they could view it in any other light than an animadversion on the political conduct of Lyons.  The Acting Chief Justice - Do you call any witnesses?  Mr. Windeyer - No your Honor; we have no case to answer.  His Honor briefly summed up the case. He was glad the case was submitted to the most impartial tribunal to which it could be submitted in the Colony; the Jury being military men and new-comers into colony were unknown to the parties and went into the box unprejudiced either one way or the other. The Jury must dismiss from their minds any weight they might attach to the circumstance of the information having been filed by permission of the Court; the Court when it granted the information was sitting in the nature of a Grand Jury and if a corpus delicti was laid before it would give no opinion one way or the other but merely decide whether it was a case that should be sent to a Jury. It had been stated by the counsel for the prosecution that the information was filed by the Attorney-General which was not the case; the Attorney General had nothing to do with it it was filed by Mr. Lyons by leave of the Court although by the Act of Parliament all informations were necessary to be signed by the Attorney-General. The information charged the object and intention of the defendants in writing the article complained of to pervert the end of justice and prevent the plaintiff from having a fair and impartial trial; and the Jury must look at the whole article and say whether the defendants did so intend. By an Act of Parliament 33rd George III c. 60 commonly called Fox's Act Jurors are at liberty in libel cases to find their own verdict both as to law and fact. The intention of the defendants was the question for the Jury; but as there was no evidence of intention the Jury must gather the intention from the paper itself. If the paper bore on the face of it an evident attempt to prejudice the minds of the Jury who were to try the former case it must be presumed that the defendants intended to do so; for it was a maxim of law as well as common sense that a man must be presumed to intend to do that which is the necessary consequence of his acts; and therefore it was from the paper itself that the jury must gather the intent. No doubt the jury who tried the case tried it by the evidence and would be warned by the Judge to dismiss all preconceived notions from their minds; but that did not affect the intent of the defendants. If the paper had a tendency to prejudice the minds of the jury the defendants were guilty of the charge laid in the information. The real question His Honor said was was the true intention of the publication merely to attack the political character of Lyons or to make that a colour for prejudicing the mind of the jury by pretending that such was the object? His Honor concluded by remarking that it would be in vain to establish Courts of Justice if jurors were to be influenced by publications before they came into Court. Justice would only be a farce if their minds were to be embued with ideas to divert them from the circumstances of cases as proved in evidence.  The jury retired for about five minutes and returned a verdict of Not Guilty.  Counsel for the prosecution Messrs. Therry Foster and Raymond; for the defendants Mr. Windeyer and Messrs. Carr and Rogers as solicitors.  Gentlemen of the Grand Jury:  You have been called together by virtue of the commission which has just been read for the purpose of assisting in your capacity of grand jurors in delivering the temporary gaol of the prisoners who have been confined there and although in ordinary circumstances I should only consider it necessary to call your attention to the cases which will come before you and to offer any suggestion or tender any advice which might occur to me or be required by you with reference to those cases I feel that upon the present occasion - one so interesting to us all when as the first judge I address you the first grand jury of this newly constituted Province - shall not be considered as overstepping the limits of my duty or trespassing unnecessarily upon your time . . . if my observations should extend to a greater length than I should otherwise deem advisable. [167]  You are aware that in the neighbouring colonies it has been considered inexpedient to concede the full right of trial by jury. The reasons which have been considered as justifying such restriction elsewhere do not however happily prevail here: and I feel no slight degree of satisfaction in being able to congratulate the free inhabitants of South Australia not in being admitted to but in being able to claim as their birthright the full and unrestricted privileges of the British constitution amongst which not the least valuable is that which has justly been styled the palladium of English liberty - trial by jury - an institution which however it may have been occasionally abused (and no human institution is free from imperfection) has been proved by the experience of ages in our native land "the inviolate island of the brave and free" to have well deserved that appellation.  Amongst the many interesting and novel features which the formation of our colony presents it is not the least interesting that within four months from the landing of the government and the first colonists upon these shores - shores hitherto untrodden by the foot of civilized man - there were found means of assembling together a number of gentlemen capable of constituting a grand and petit jury who in point of intelligence and respectability are I will venture to say not inferior to any similar body seen in the mother country.  I am assigned servant to Mr. Dangar; I was at his station at Myall Creek as hutkeeper for five months in June 1838. Mr. Hobbs lives there as superintendent; he left home to go to the Big River in the beginning of June; when he left there were some native blacks there; I have said there were twenty but I am sure there was that number and upwards; I would not swear there were not forty. While master was away some white men came on a Saturday evening about ten in number; I cannot say how many days after master left; they came on horseback armed with muskets and swords and pistols; all were armed; I was at home when they came and the stock-keeper; I was sitting with Kilmeister the stock-keeper in the hut; the blacks were all encamped ready for the night; they were not more than two yards from the hut; this was about an hour and a half before sundown. There were plenty of women and children amongst them. The blacks when they saw the men coming ran into our hut and the men then all of them got off their horses; and Russel had a rope which was round a horse's neck and he began to undo it whilst the blacks were in the hut. While he was undoing it I asked what they were going to do with the blacks and Russel said "We are going to take them over the back of the range to frighten them." Russell and some one or two went in [...] . I heard the crying of the blacks for relief or assistance to me and Kilmeister; they were moaning the same as a mother and children would cry; there were small things that could not walk; there were a good many small boys and girls. After they were tied I saw Russel bring the end of the rope out they were tied with and give it to one of the men on one of the horses I cannot say which. The party then went away with the blacks; the man who took the rope from Russel went in front and the others behind; all the blacks were tied together and this rope tied them all fast; they were tied with their hands - one black fellow had on a pair of handcuffs - they were all fastened with one rope; it was a tether-rope for horses in a field; it was a very long rope; they brought out the whole except two that made their escape as the men were coming up; they were two little boys and they jumped into the creek close by the hut; there was no water in it; they escaped at a dry part. [290] One black gin (i.e. woman) they left with me in the hut; they left her because she was good-looking; they said so; I forget which. Another black gin they left that was with Davy another black fellow that was with me. There was a little child at the back of the hut when they were tying this party; and when the blacks and party were going away this little child as I thought was going to follow the party with its mother; but I took hold of it and put it into the hut and stopped it from going. I had two little boys the small child two gins and Davy and Billy; they all went away except these; the children were going after their mothers. There was an old man named Daddy the oldest of the lot; he was called Old Daddy; he was an old big tall man. This Daddy and another old man named Josey they never tied along with the rest; they were crying and did not want to go; they made no resistance. Some of the children were not tied; others were; they followed the rest that were tied. The small ones two or three were not able to walk; the women carried them on their backs in opossum-skins. [...] . They were not in sight above a minute or so after they went away. About a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes at the outside I heard the report of two pistols one after the other; the reports came from the same direction they went; the second was quite plain for any one to hear; I only heard two; I did not hear anything else but those two. It was just before sundown. Next night after the same men came back to the hut where they took the blacks from; they were all together of a lump except Kilmeister who was left behind.  They slept all night. . [...] Next morning three of them after they had breakfast took firesticks out of the hut Russel Fleming and another [...] . Kilmeister asked me for the leg-rope and I gave it to him and they went in the same direction as they took the blacks and that I heard the two pieces. One of the men was left behind.  During the time they were away I asked Foley if any of the blacks had made their escape; he said none that he saw; he said all were killed except one black gin. Before the party came back Foley drew one of the swords out of the case and showed it to me; it was all over blood. [...] In about an hour the other men came back to the hut. I saw smoke in the same direction they went; this was soon after they went with the firesticks. [...] . They got upon their horses; and Fleming told Kilmeister to go up bye- and-bye and put the logs of wood together and be sure all was consumed.  Motion to enter a verdict for the defendant. This was an action of special assumpsit for falsely warranting the defendant's title to a horse sold and delivered by him to the plaintiff at the price of £30 with the common counts. Plea non-assumpsit. At the trial before Stephen J and assessors on September 25 1839 it appeared in evidence that the defendant sold the horse in question to the plaintiff in May 1837 at the price of £30 and gave him a bought and sold note without any warranty or affirmation of title. The plaintiff lost the horse shortly after the sale and in August following being found in the possession of a Mr. Suttor of Bathurst it was claimed by a Mr. Edward Cox as his property having been stolen from him two years before. Mr. Cox went before the Police Magistrate at Bathurst and swore to the horse and the magistrate ordered it to be delivered up to him he giving a bond to produce the horse again when called upon for the purposes of justice. Several attempts had been made by Mr. Cox to discover the thief by tracing the horse through the hands of several possessors but without success. The defendant had become possessed of the horse by a sale at public auction at Bathurst; the animal had been seized and sold under the Licensing Act as being employed to carry spirits about the country for the purpose of being illegally retailed. There was no proof of any public market or fair being held at Bathurst. The defendant contended that the action was not maintainable without express warranty or affirmation of title and that the sale by public auction by order of the magistrate must be regarded as a sale in market overt. The plaintiff relied on failure of consideration. A verdict having been entered for the plaintiff with leave reserved etc the court was moved to enter a verdict for the defendant and on October 12 the judgment of the court was delivered by - Dowling C.J.: We are of opinion that this action is maintainable and that the verdict entered for the plaintiff must stand. Three propositions were sought to be established on the part of the defendant. First that the sale by auction to the defendant under the orders of the magistrates at Bathurst amounted in law to a sale in market overt so as absolutely to change the right of property in the absence of any proof of knowledge in the defendant that the horse was stolen or any other indication of fraud. Secondly that supposing this not to be a sale in market overt yet Cox could not claim the horse without prosecuting the supposed thief to conviction. [284] And thirdly that at all events this action could not be maintained without an express warranty or affirmation of title in the horse or proof of a guilty knowledge that the defendant had no title in the animal. As to the first point I think it cannot be maintained that a sale by public auction at a place not authoritatively appointed by law for publicly buying and selling is a market overt. It is not found as a fact in this case that this sale took place in an open public market-place. It was simply a sale by auction but with what notoriety or advertisement previously to the sale does not appear. But six persons seem to have been in attendance at the auction. It has been holden by this court that a sale in market overt has a legal technical meaning even in this colony. In McLucas and another V. Hunt tried on the 7th April 1834 the plaintiff bought cattle at a fair value openly and publicly in the day time in the yard of an inn at Parramatta of a man named Young (many persons being present) and resold them to the defendant who paid the plaintiff partly in cash and partly by his promissory note. Before the promissory note became due it was discovered that the cattle were stolen by Young (who was afterwards brought to justice) and the plaintiff having brought his action against the defendant upon the note it was contended that the sale in the inn yard was under the circumstances in this colony (where we have at present no public fairs or open cattle markets in country places) tantamount to a sale in market overt but after solemn argument Chief Justice Forbes Mr. Justice Burton and myself held that in this court we are bound to give a legal technical meaning to "a sale in market overt" and that as the right of property was not changed by such a sale as was proved the plaintiff could not recover. If we were to hold that a sale by public auction however notorious in a place appointed by the vendor himself or by any other person amounted in law to a sale in market overt it is scarcely necessary to point out the evil consequences which might result in this colony. Such a mode of sale might afford a ready mode of disposing of stolen property without the knowledge of the true owners. Such a sale has none of the well-known incidents of a sale in market overt; one of which is that it shall be in a public open place duly appointed for that purpose by public authority to which all persons may have recourse. The sale here may have been by the orders of the magistrates and the defendant may have been an innocent purchaser yet we have no authority for treating such a sale as a sale in market overt. Whenever we shall have public markets established in the country places of this colony it is probable that the doctrine contended for may become applicable to similar transactions but in the present case there is no basis for the argument which has been addressed to us.  The Gentlemen who Signed the requisition for a meeting to be held on Thursday the 16th Current to take into Consideration the necessity of forming a Joint Stock Auction Company in Melbourne assembled together this day Wednesday the 8th April 1840 by Mutual Consent at the office of William Meek Esqre and deeming delay injurious to the prospects of the Company formed themselves into a Joint Stock Company appointing Directors with power to add to their number and Officers and issuing a prospectus of the Company of which the following is a Copy. [87]  From the unexampled prosperity of the Town of Melbourne the Capital of Australia Felix especially in a Commercial point of view from the rapidity with which it has become in the short space of Three Years the Second town in the territory of New South Wales & from the Constant & daily increase of its Trade both in Stock and merchandise of every description almost the whole of which is disposed of thro' the medium of Public Auction.  It is proposed in order to meet the wishes of the World Generally as Well as those of the resident Stockholders & Graziers of this magnificent district and also to further the interests of Gentlemen introducing Stock for Sale from the elder Colony to form a Joint Stock Auction Company in the Town of Melbourne to be denominated  "The Australia Felix Auction Company"  with a Capital of £50.000. to be raised in shares of Ten pounds each. The Said Company to be managed by Twenty Resident Directors and one Managing Director. That the plan & principle upon which the Sydney Auction is conducted & which have been found to work so admirably be adopted as the System of conducting the affairs of this Company.  While the projectors of this Company admit that the profitable results of such an institution must mainly depend upon its judicious management they at the same time feel confident that the period has arrived for the formation of such a Company and that no public Institution as yet formed in Melbourne offers so many advantages to the Proprietors with so little risk and so small an outlay of Capital....  Fifty Shares to qualify for Directorship.  Seven Aborigines from the district of Macquarie were placed at the bar on a charge of cattle stealing. Their names were Dundomah Tommy Boker Benjamin Jemmie Tommy Bang Bang Carbon Mark and Murramundong Simon; when called on to plead each of them denied the charge except Tommy Boker who said the beef was good.  The Attorney-General suggested to His Honor the propriety of assigning Mr. Broadhurst as Counsel for the prisoners on which that gentleman was sent for. The Attorney-General further remarked that cases against the Aborigines were now of so frequent occurrence that it would in his opinion be proper for the Court to assign standing counsel for the Aborigines when brought before it on criminal charges. His Honor thought that the suggestion was a very fair one. The messenger returned and informed the Court that Mr. Broadhurst was not at home on which His Honor sent for Mr. Purefoy. The prisoners were then informed that counsel had been sent for to speak for them but they made no answer. They were afterwards asked if they any objection to either of the Jurors and made answer "they would all do."  Mr. Purefoy having arrived the indictment was read which charged the prisoners with having killed two head of cattle at "Bang Bang" with intent to steal the flesh; a second count charged them with having stolen the cattle.  The Attorney-General in stating the case to the Jury said that the aborigines being acknowledged as subjects of the British Crown the same law applied to them as to the whites; but it must be evident that when they came to take their trial they did so under great disadvantages as the only witnesses they could produce were the members of their own tribe who not being christians could not be admitted as witnesses; he also stated that from information which he had received through Mr. Keck he had reason to believe that the prisoners were the wildest blacks that had ever been brought to trial they had but little knowledge of the rights of property and before their apprehension had comparatively little communication with white men as the quarter of the colony they came from was but thinly peopled with whites. It might be that the prisoners had considered themselves justified in taking the cattle which the whites had brought to their land and which had driven off their kangaroos and wallaby but still the law applied to them as well as to the white. It was well known in the neighbourhood where the prisoners had been taken that for a considerable time the settlers there had been subjected to serious losses by their cattle being speared but since the prisoners had been taken into custody these depredations had not been r[e]peated which was a circumstance that went [a] considerable way to show that the prisoners had been parties to the rushing and killing of he [sic] cattle. He then called.  Mr. John James Allman who said -- I am Commissioner of Crown Lands at Wellington. The blacks are very numerous on the Macquarie River particularly in the lower part about one hundred and forty miles from Wellington or three hundred and seventy miles from Sydney; I apprehended the prisoner in July last; they are part of the Bang Bang tribe mixed with the "Harris Mount" tribe; there were about two hundred and fifty or three hundred natives present when I took the prisoners on information that they had been spearing the cattle; I went with four Police Men to Bang Bang and got the assistance of Mr. Wm. Lawson and another gentlemen - I also engaged a very intelligent black boy; we all set out in search of the tribe and came to a water hole where we found the head and hide of a bullock which had been recently slaughtered by four spears being thrust into it - I knew it was a bullock from the size of the head and hide; it was a full sized bullock; the brand had been carefully removed from the hip of the hide; we searched about and got on the tracks of the blacks they had gone down the creek about three miles from the water-hole; we came to where they had sat down made fires and roasted the flesh; there were several remains of the carcases with a number of unfinished spears lying about; the fires were still smoking; about ten miles farther we found that they had left the creek and gone off at an acute angle; we came upon them about four miles farther on we sneaked on them and heard the gins calling out to the men; we then put the horses to the gallop and rode into the middle of the tribe; we found they had a very considerable quantity of beef with them; I also found the heads of two calves with them; I then selected the seven prisoners on information which I had previously received; Jemmie was the only one who made resistance; the gins were apart from the men when we came upon them and had most of the arms of the men with them; we got between the women and the men and of course prevented the men from getting their arms; I understood best what was said by Jemmie; I asked him why he had been killing cattle; he told me that the Myall fellows meaning the "Mount Harris tribe" called the Bee Bee Jibbery tribe had done it; he denied having killed any cattle; this information I got through the black boy whom I had hired as a guide.  The Attorney-General said he would not be able to carry the case much farther but he thought there was evidence enough to convict the prisoners on the first count.  His Honor asked if the Attorney-General thought there was evidence on which to convict a white man? The Attorney-General said he thought there was; he then called Mr. Arthur Wiggins the Superintendent of Captain Raine whose head station was at Narramine on the Macquarie where he had seen all of the prisoners who had according to information been slaughtering the settlers' cattle; the party got information of the tribe being at Killindoon; they were traced farther about four miles when between three or four hundred of them were come upon. This witness was called on by Captain Allman to pick out eight of the most influential of the blacks when he selected the prisoners with another black who could speak English very well. It having been proved by the testimony of a white man that the eighth man had only joined the tribe on the preceding day he was afterwards discharged. The prisoner Carborn Mark when apprehended had a shin of beef in his possession; the witness thought he was very much altered and could not swear to him he knew Jemmie Dundomah and Micky. The prisoners said that the Myall tribe had killed the cattle and the prisoners were only eating the flesh. There had been a great number of cattle missing before the prisoners were apprehended viz. - bullocks cows and calves but the witness had lost none since the prisoners had been taken but he had seen other cattle speared lying on the runs since the prisoners were taken.  Mr. Purefoy submitted that there was no evidence to fix the crime on the prisoners.  His Honour in putting the case to the jury left it to them to enquire what proof there was that the prisoners had killed the bullocks or that they had even feloniously become possessed of the flesh found on them when apprehended or that they knew it to have been stolen; he submitted that they might be liable to an indictment for that but from all that appeared the cattle might have died at the waterhole; he also said that considering the loose character of the evidence against the prisoners he should not like to have the pressure of a verdict of guilty on his mind were he in the jury box. The jury returned a verdict of not guilty.  The Attorney-General then put another information on the file charging the prisoners with receiving the beef knowing it to have been stolen.  His Honor appeared to have great doubts whether he could legally entertain such a charge as from the evidence of the interpreter it appeared there was no word in the language of the prisoners which would translate the term receiving; it was however ultimately accomplished by telling the prisoners that they were charged with eating the flesh of cattle feloniously slaughtered by other blacks. The above evidence was then repeated when Mr. Purefoy for the prisoners submitted that there was no case against them. The Chief Justice considered it was a very important fact for the jury to enquire into viz whether the prisoners had any idea that their being possessed of stolen property was a crime as it had come out in evidence that they thought the thief only was answerable. He also stated that there was no proof that any cattle had been feloniously slaughtered.  The jury retired for about ten minutes and returned a verdict of not guilty and the prisoners were removed. ...  The seven Aborigines were then placed at the bar and told that if they or any of their tribe were found spearing the cattle of white men they would be taken up and hanged. They said they would hunt for kangaroos and opposums for themselves and if they saw any black men spearing cattle they would bring them prisoners to the white men. They also said they would like to get back to their old ground and were then ordered to be removed to the Benevolent Asylum until arrangements can be made for their being returned to Bang Bang on the Macquarie.  By the proceedings of this day indeed we ought to shew that we are ripe for those representative institutions which we are all anxious for. He would say that he was quite ready (forgetting the past) to come forward and meet any other portion of the public and discuss this subject upon reasonable grounds. He would not come to discuss the propriety of a £10 suffrage because there is and could be no such thing in the colony; but if any other party would come forward and propose any reasonable terms he would give them his support. [...] . he hoped the period was not far distant when the people of this colony will make their voices heard in the regions of Downing street and obtain a representative legislature. He would not enter further into his views on the subject than to say that he thought the time had arrived when the long agitated emancipist question might be dropped and that it would be unwise in the new bill to have any clause whatever upon the subject. These opinions he would observe were not new to him as might be found upon reference to the archives of Downing street although he had to bear the odium of being opposed to the emancipist interest.  MURDER.  John Kelly holding a ticket of leave was given in charge to a jury for the murder of Jack Smith on the 13th of June last at Stroud by firing at him a loaded musket.  Mr. Cheeke appeared for the prisoner.  The Attorney General in stating the case entreated the jury not pay it the less attention because the unfortunate deceased was an aboriginal native.  William Macdonald examined by the Attorney-General. - I am in the Agricultural Company's service at Port Stephens; the prisoner was a fellow-servant of mine and lived with me in the same hut; on Sunday the 13th June the prisoner came into the hut about half an hour after sundown and said that there was a large tribe of blacks coming with a bad intention; he told me to get a waddy to defend myself; he took a musket himself and loaded it with duck-shot; in the morning he had told me that he would get some shot from Mr Darby; the prisoner brought three black fellows to the hut; one of them said that he did not want to harm the prisoner but that he only wanted his gin or wife; he said part of this in his native language; I only saw three blacks there; the prisoner himself brought the blacks to the hut; he told them to come in and satisfy themselves that the black gin was not there; when they went in he said if they came out he would shoot them; he was then outside the hut; he said that they came to steal corn and not for the gin; there was no corn in the hut then; I was at the door; the blacks were not two minutes in the hut; they rushed out and when they got to the end of the hut the gun went off; I saw the smoke and fire and the prisoner's hand moved; I cannot swear that the prisoner pulled the trigger; the gun was pointed to the blacks; they were seven or eight yards off at the time; the prisoner stood at the door; he loaded the gun again; I did not see any of the blacks fall; I ran to the farm and told Mr. Darby about the matter; I stayed with him all night; the blacks had boomerangs with them; they did not offer us any violence; I saw no one of the blacks dead; I don't know who owned the musket; it was for shooting at cockatoos.  Cross-examined by Mr. Cheeke. - I have been two years in the Company's employ; the prisoner and I lived together for a week; he had the gun for some time before to keep the cockatoos from the maize; I used to fire at the cockatoos; I don't know whether I fired off the gun that day; it was dusk when the Blacks came to the hut; I could see about a quarter of a mile off at the time; the prisoner brought the gun from the hut; the day before the prisoner fired the gun at the Blacks it was fired off at the cockatoos by the prisoner; sometimes the gun was loaded; it was not loaded on the Saturday night; I did not see the prisoner load the gun that night; I saw him put up the gun that night and it was not then loaded; the gun had an iron ramrod; the prisoner was not many minutes loading the gun; I saw him loading it; he was then about fifteen yards from me; he was standing still at the time; I was so frightened I did not see him prime the gun; I was frightened with the noise; the three blacks had boomerangs; I only saw three but I heard the noise of two or three more; they were hooting; I told Mr. Darby that there was a lot of blacks at the hut with boomerangs; I never saw or knew the blacks to steal corn; but the prisoner the day before shewed me the marks of a foot near the store; when the blacks were in the hut the prisoner said something to me about going to Mr. Darby about a constable or about reporting the matter but it is so long since I don't recollect what he then said; I did not know the blacks or any of them; the words of the blacks might have meant "me do you no harm;" I looked at Kelly when the blacks were running away because I was frightened; I did not hear the gun cocked but it was pointed against the blacks when they rushed out of the hut; I did not see the prisoner present the gun at all; I did not see the prisoner change his place but when the gun went off it was pointed at the blacks; I did see the prisoner turn round when the blacks rushed out of the hut; when the prisoner turned round the gun went off immediately; I remained all night at Mr. Darby's and would not go back again to the hut.  To a Juror. - The musket was an old one; but I do not know whether it went off at half-cock; the prisoner was in a horrid passion when the gun went off. The witness described the prisoner's position when the gun went off and from his description it appeared that when the gun went off its position was nearly the same as it had been while the blacks had been in the hut and that they ran in the direction to which the gun was first pointed.  To a Juror. - I never saw any gin with Kelly at the hut.  To Mr. Justice Stephen. - The blacks came quietly into the hut and were brought there by Kelly; I think he told them that they had come to steal corn; the door remained open all the time; while the prisoner was speaking to me the blacks rushed out.  James Charles White examined by the Attorney General - I saw the prisoner in June last one morning; I was looking out for a constable but he came to me himself; I asked him how he came to shoot the blackfellow; he said what was I to do when the boomerangs was flying about me; the prisoner said he came to tell me of the circumstance as I was superintendant; he said he had been too sharp for the blacks and that he up with his musket and let fly at them; I ordered him into custody and he said he did not want to run away; Macdonald did not tell me that the prisoner had fired at a black; he only said he thought there would be a row about a black gin; when I went to the black camp I saw Jack Smith; he was lying before the fire in great pain; he had been a very quiet lad; he was wounded in the back and complained of a pain in his abdomen; he seemed to have been wounded by shot; I brought him medical attendance; he died that day; I know nothing about the prisoner's having had a gin with him; I put Macdonald into custody with the prisoner; the prisoner had been about four years with the Company; the blacks are always at Stroud and the prisoner must have seen the deceased who could speak English very well; the Company give the blacks a feast at Christmas; I think the prisoner must have known the deceased.  The Attorney-General was about enquiring as to what the deceased said when lying before the fire but Mr. Creeke objected to any such evidence and Mr. Justice Stephen said that the evidence was inadmissible unless it were shown that the deceased was conscious he was dying and believed in the existence of a future state.  Cross-examined by Mr. Cheeke. - The prisoner came to me early in the morning of his own accord; I went them to the Camp and saw Jacky Smith; the family of the deceased consisted of three persons; one of them was called Gammoning Smith and the other Jemmy Smith; the deceased was called Jacky or Jacky Smith; he was called after his master's name; the father and sister of the deceased are great thieves; I have heard that the blacks have stolen corn from [t]he hut where it is kept; the prisoner was always a well behaved man.  To a Juror. - The prisoner had charge of the corn.  To the Judge. - I never heard of another black being wounded; I would trust the prisoner with any thing; but I think he is a bad tempered man though no complaint was ever made to me against him.  John Power examined by the Attorney General. - I am a Constable at Stroud; I know the prisoner; I knew Jack Smith well; I live half a mile from the prisoner's hut; at sun-down on Sunday Smith and another black told me they were going to the prisoner's hut; I did not see any thing with them; on the Monday after I saw Smith at the Black camp and I saw him dead on Tuesday I apprehended the prisoner near the lock up on Tuesday; he had a musket with him; the deceased was a very nice young lad and was never troublesome or offensive; the prisoner said when I took him in custody on Tuesday and told him that Smith was dead that he was sorry for the deed.  Cross-examined by Mr. Cheeke. - I remember what passed very well; the prisoner made no resistance to me when I took him into custody; the musket goes off at half-cock; it has a bad flint and never throws open the pan; I only saw two blacks on the Sunday night but there were a good many about the place; they used to call the deceased Jack Smith; the Europeans used to call him John; Jack Smith was the common name for him and I'll stick to that name; it is usual to c[a]ll the blacks by a Christian name o[n]ly.  James Price examined by the Attorney-General. - I have known the prisoner for some time; but I did not know Jack Smith though I have been at Stroud for 15 years.  Cross-examined by Mr. Cheeke. - I never knew any black of the name of Jack Smith; the blacks are generally called Jacky or Harry or some such name.  Robert Mackintosh examined by the Attorney General - I am a surgeon living at Stroud; I examined an aboriginal native who went by the name of Jacky Smith; I saw him after death at the black camp; he died from a gun shot wound in the back; the wound was on the hip; I found no shot in the body but I found the intestines lacerated by some foreign matter; I think that the shot had not scattered and that the deceased was about four or five yards from the person who wounded him.  Cross-examined by Mr. Cheeke - I saw Jacky Smith the morning after his death; the man I saw was called Jacky Smith; I saw him on the 14th June; I saw Smith twice; once I saw him in Company with White; I always thought Smith was in danger.  To the Judge - The shot ran in various directions; the deceased was a young man above the middle stature and a little beyond the age of puberty; he might have been shot by a gun held at the shoulder by the party who fired it but I cannot say whether the gun was held as high as the shoulder or not.  The witness applied for remuneration for his attendance as a professional man but Mr. Justice Stephen said that he had no power to allow the witness any compensation beyond the ordinary payment of a witness's expenses though he thought professional men were well entitled to some remuneration beyond their mere travelling expenses.  Power recalled by the Attorney General. - The Jack Smith I saw going to the prisoner's on Sunday was the Jack Smith I afterwards saw dead and examined by Mr. McIntosh.  McDonald recalled by the Attorney-General. - I did not tell Mr. White that the prisoner had fired at the blacks because Mr. White ordered me away; I had a quarrel with the prisoner a week before the black was shot.  Cross-examined by Mr. Cheeke. - I cannot say how long I was at Mr. White's but I had time to say that the prisoner had frightened the blacks thought I did not say that he had fired at them.  To a Juror. - When we quarrelled Kelly struck me with a waddy and the doctor said my arm was broken or splintered.  The Attorney-General closed his case with this evidence.   Mr. Creeke submitted that there was no evidence that the man who was proved to be deceased was shot by the prisoner or that that man was called Jack Smith.  Mr. Justice Stephen held that there was evidence upon these points to go to the jury.  Mr. Creeke then addressed the jury for the prisoner and called  William Darby. - I am bailiff of the Agricultural Company; I know the prisoner and McDonald; on Sunday evening soon after sundown McDonald came to me and said to me that a number of blacks came near the hut and that three came to the door and demanded a black gin; that Kelly admitted them into the hut and told them to stay there till McDonald went for a constable; McDonald told me that the blacks had boomerangs spears and waddies; he said that he did not see Kelly lift the gun when he shot the blacks and that he believed Kelly did not shoot them intentionally; McDonald is a thorough liar; and I have known him for about twelve months; the blacks have stolen maize and are a nuisance to the settlement; I have never known Kelly injury [sic] the blacks; he for some time maintained a black man with him and paid for his maintenance.  Cross-examined by the Attorney-General. - I cannot say that Kelly is a good-tempered man; I do not know whether Kelly ever had a black woman with him; I cannot mention any instance of McDonald's lying; McDonald said to me that he did not think the firing was intentional by Kelly; he told me too that Kelly had not raised the gun to his shoulder when he fired it.  To Mr. Justice Stephen. - I cannot say that I would not believe McDonald on his oath.  McDonald recalled by the Attorney-General. - I don't recollect having told Mr. Darby that the blacks had spears; I know that they had no spears; I don't remember having told Mr. Darby that Kelly had fired unintentionally at the blacks.  The Attorney-General addressed the Jury in reply.  Mr. Justice Stephen charged the Jury. The learned Judge read over the whole of the evidence and commented upon it at great length. The Jury retired for about a quarter of an hour and upon their return to Court delivered a verdict of Guilty but strongly recommended the prisoner to mercy on account of his good character.  In answer to Mr. Justice Stephen the Jury stated that they believed that the prisoner had fired the gun intentionally and with the design of hitting some of the blacks.  The Attorney-General prayed judgment against the prisoner and Mr. Justice Stephen (having remarked upon the ability with which the prisoner had been defended and upon the probability arising from the whole of the evidence that the unhappy murder had been committed in a moment of bad temper) sentenced the prisoner to death; but promised that though he could hold out no hopes of mercy to the prisoner he would lay the whole case before his Excellency the Governor who alone had the power here of commuting the sentence of death.  The more we observe of that most admirable contemptible wonderful anomalous being man the more we are satisfied that he is as much the slave of custom and habit as the meanest animal of creation. [26] Man in a colony is simply a money-making creature. From morn till night all the year round his faculties are strained up to and concentrated upon that one object. He has no time for anything else. No time to love no time to hate no time to rejoice no time to mourn. He does not seem even to heap up riches that he may enjoy them. He does not buy books pictures busts or laboratories or any other means of strictly rational pleasure for the sake of rational pleasure but he makes money that he may have it and enable his wife perhaps by piquant dinners and stylish equipage to excite the envy hatred malice and uncharitableness of her neighbours. Life to the money-making colonist is truly a battle; a great fight which he unceasingly carries on in order that he may win a joyless fortune and at last die respectably - with assets.  Hence it is that in New South Wales we are never put out of our way by sudden deaths or unexpected bereavements of friends and relations. Whilst we are all laying about us right and left for the purpose of effecting our own advancement we as little turn aside from our own absorbing pursuits when we find a man down as we should do at a Waterloo or in an earthquake. We bury each other with about as much emotion as we feel when we dine with each other perhaps frequently with more pleasure. This is a remarkable fact. We should probably regard it as philosophy and stoicism if we did not know it to be acquired insensibility.  We have been betrayed into this slight opening-up of an old vein of thought in us by a recent event which ought not to be without interest to those who feel or profess to feel an interest in the condition of New South Wales. A man of many remarkable qualities of mind and character of singular industry energy and general ability and favourably distinguished from the mass in a variety of ways has very lately been removed from among us by death. Richard Windeyer has passed from time into eternity with little more notice or observation than is usually paid to the memory of the least interesting individual who has paid the debt of nature. We have heard one or two persons express surprise at this. We however so far from participating in such a feeling should have felt surprise had it been otherwise. It would have slightly disturbed our conviction of the indifferency of colonial human nature and shaken the theory which we have above faintly adumbrated to the reader.  We have never been willing and we believe we are unable to acquire this insensibility. We would not for more gold than we could tell give up the delight we can always feel in the contemplation of a great character. When our hope and confidence in human goodness and honesty wax faint within us a thought of such men as Hampden and Washington will purge away the perilous stuff which weighs upon our heart and put us again upon tolerant terms with our own nature. It is for this reason that we believe it to be good - not merely as a tribute of respect to the departed but as a means of encouraging men towards unselfish aims and objects - to notice and discuss the merits of every man who having done or attempted something for the benefit of his race has left his life to us as a portion of human history which may be studied for the benefit of the survivors. [27] The season too for such a notice is advantageous. Death is a great soberiser of the more volatile and thoughtless part of us. The mind expatiates with a thoughtful awe in the void which death has made. We discuss but the memory and the image of the man whom so lately we saw and heard in all the alert intelligence of this apparently immortal life. What is he? Where is he? What is he doing now? It is truly a mighty change to take place in one second of time - that change from life to death which makes such questions necessary. Whatever he is wherever he is whatever he may be doing we shall soon very soon all of us go to the knowledge of it as God shall please. So let us whilst we are permitted sometimes close our ledgers and cast aside our briefs and think of this unshunnable destiny that awaits us a little onward. Thus shall we grow familiar with it and when our hour is come we shall go hence with decency and with composure.  A SHORT ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF WALKERVILLE  Christian Friends - It is proposed if God permit to begin a great work in your village - that work is the building of a school-house for a week-day school and providing teachers capable of giving sound and useful instruction to such children as may become scholars. This is in truth a great work for education; a sound education based on Christian principles puts the young in possession of means which will enable them to turn to the best account the powers of body and mind which God has given them.  As the Minister of the Church at Walkerville I am most anxious that this work should go forward for your sakes - yes for your sakes - it is the good of all of you that is sought. [179]  Now you cannot expect this school to be built unless every resident in the place comes forward and does what he is able towards the carrying out of this object. Let no one of you deceive himself that his assistance will be but little and that he is therefore justified in doing nothing.  Many not in any way connected with the place have promised their aid but you cannot suppose that others will help you if you shew no disposition to help yourselves. Remember as Christians you are accountable to God for advancing or neglecting the best interests of your brethren. How then will you be held guiltless if you refuse to assist in the education of those about you?  Give us then I would beg of you your sincere prayers now and your hearty assistance at the night of the meeting.  Your affectionate Minister  T. P. WILSON.  Adelaide November 28 1848.  THE GREAT PROTEST MEETING  The public demonstration so long intended in the colony upon the arrival of the first convict ship took place yesterday at the Circular Wharf. It is well known that the Hashemy has been unexpectedly delayed in her voyage; and though looked for from day to day the intense interest of the people of Sydney in the event did not abate and during Saturday and Sunday very considerable excitement prevailed throughout the city. Monday morning was about as unpropitious in point of weather as a day could be for an open air meeting. There was nothing either of comfort or hope about it. Nevertheless about 11 oclock most of the leading merchants and shopkeepers closed their establishments and large numbers of people began to wend their way to the Circular Quay. The only accommodation there was an omnibus from the top of which the speakers addressed the meeting consisting of between four and five thousand persons and who in spite of continued rain persisted in grave earnestness in the fulfilment of their important duty. Nearly half an hour having been spent in waiting for the arrival of the honourable and learned member for Sydney (Mr. Lowe) who was to have acted as Chairman Mr. Robert Campbell was unanimously called on to preside. THE Chairman then addressed the meeting. He was deeply sensible of the honour conferred upon him in being called upon to preside on so grand an occasion as the present. [244]  He called it a grand occasion and it was so for it was the gathering together of a community to maintain their own good name and to uphold their own rights. (Great cheers.) No doubt there were those in the colony who hailed the advent of convicts amongst them as a boon but he was quite sure that none with such opinions were present on that occasion. (Cheers.) Convicts had been the source of wealth to many; many hoped again to amass riches from their services; but Australia now wanted them not - she could very well do without them. They - the men of Australia had wives and children and they would be content to subdue the land and replenish it without the introduction of British crime and its attendant - British misery. (Cheers.) They were asked to receive an importation which they should look on with abhorrence. They were called to welcome the arrival in their port of a vessel the value of whose freight was to be estimated only by the amount of the riddance of crime it afforded to England. (Cheers.) He had been called upon entirely unprepared to preside at the meeting and he felt that to detain them long would be unwise; but though taken on the moment he did not shrink from the duty cast upon him. He looked upon that duty as a hallowed and sacred one - a duty in the due performance of which the honour of Great Britain and the liberties of the colony were alike involved. It was therefore with a deep sense of the duty he was called on to perform that he accepted the Office of presiding over a meeting - called to protest against branding again this colony with the name of a penal settlement. He was born in this colony - its advancement and progression had always been one of his dearest wishes but no attainment of wealth no possession of power could compensate them for the loss of a good name; and once again let Australia be made a penal settlement and she would again be the despised of nations. (Cheers.) He would now call on the honorable member of Council Mr. Lamb to move the first resolution.  Mr. Lamb came forward and was received with loud cheers: It was to him an honour as well as a duty to come forward to move the resolution which had been put into his hands. An honour inasmuch as it assured him of the British character of the community in which he lived - a duty because he would cease to be worthy to live in any British community and see unmoved its fair fame abandoned. [245] (Cheers.) In the protest there was not one word with which he could find fault no sentiment from which he could dissent. He believed it to breathe a spirit of loyalty to the Queen exhibited most worthily in the sense it expressed of the in-justice sought to be inflicted on them.: (Cheers.) But if there was one part of the peoples protest with which he more cordially concurred than another it was in the fourth clause of that protest. He did uphold that it was in the highest degree unjust to sacrifice the great social and political interests of the colony at large to the pecuniary profit of a fraction of its inhabitants. (Cheers.) He Mr. Lamb did proclaim it monstrous that an outrage so gross as that of thrusting convicted felons upon them should be attempted because it might assist the material interests of a clique. (Immense cheering.) They the men of the colony had done their duty on this question - they had at once when first offered the gilded iniquity refused it with disdain - they had steadily opposed it through all the phases in which it had been presented to their view - they had turned from it because they knew it was evil and could not work good. They had opposed it in every shape and if in the Legislative Council of the country the voice of indignation had been silent at all events its unanimous verdict against this infliction would be the more conclusive. (Cheers.) They had expressed their opinions as a free people ought to express them - in the Council and out of it - and they had done right to meet on this occasion solemnly to protest against the evil and injustice which they could not altogether avert. In the Cape of Good Hope public indignation at the attempt to introduce these prisoners could scarcely be withheld and sooner than have them it was proposed that the Government should be petitioned to send them on here; but he hoped the display of moral force which had been exhibited on this question would be sufficient to show that New South Wales had some sense of what was due to herself and what would be expected from her as a British community by the world at large. They had met peaceably - they had met in all loyalty - in all deference to the constituted authorities - in the highest and holiest patriotism that could animate them as citizens - for the love they bore their families - in their loyalty to Great Britain and in the depth of their reverence to Almighty God - to protest against the landing again of British criminals on these shores. [246] (Immense cheers.) He was not an elective member of their Legislative Council but as a citizen he asserted his rights on this occasion and would do his best to battle for his fellow citizens. (Cheers.) Many far more able than himself to expose the injustice sought to be inflicted on them would address the meeting but to none would he yield in heartfelt earnestness to prevent this colony - the land not only of their adoption - the land which by associations by the ties of family and connexion had become thoroughly their own from being again degraded and polluted by the name of a penal settlement. (Loud Cheers.) Mr. Lamb having then read the Protest (as follows) proposed its adoption: - We the free and loyal subjects of Her Most Gracious Majesty inhabitants of the city of Sydney and its immediate neighbourhood in public meeting assembled do hereby enter our most deliberate and solemn Protest against the transportation of British criminals to the colony of New South Wales.  FIRSTLY. - Because it is in violation of the will of the majority of the colonists as is clearly evidenced by their expressed opinions on this question at all times.  SECONDLY. - Because numbers among us have emigrated on the faith of the British Government that transportation to this colony had ceased for ever.  THIRDLY. - Because it is incompatible with our existence as a free colony desiring self-government to be the receptacle of another countrys felons.  FOURTHLY. - Because it is in the highest degree unjust to sacrifice the great social and political interests of the colony at large to the pecuniary profit of a fraction of its inhabitants.  FIFTHLY. - Because being firmly and devotedly attached to the British Crown we greatly fear that the perpetration of so stupendous an act of injustice by Her Majestys Government will go far towards. alienating the affections of the people of this colony from the mother country.  For these and many kindred reasons in the exercise of our duty to our country - for the love we bear our families - in the strength of our loyalty to Great Britain - and from the depth of our reverence for Almighty God - we protest against the landing again of British convicts on these shores. [247]  Mr. Lowe who at this moment arrived upon the ground came forward to second the adoption of the Protest and was received with enthusiastic applause. It was with great pleasure that he undertook the task of seconding the adoption of the protest of the people of the colony of New South Wales against the outrage which had been so insultingly and offensively perpetrated upon them by the resumption of transportation. The time for discussion on the principle of the convict question was past. They were not met to exclaim against the proposals of the English Government. The threat of degradation had been fulfilled. The stately presence of their city the beautiful waters of their harbour were this day again polluted with the presence of that floating hell - a convict ship. (Immense cheers.) They had lived again to behold the cargo of crime borne across the waves to them. In their port they behold a ship freighted not with the comforts of life not with luxuries of civilised nations not with the commodities of commerce in exchange for our produce; but with the moral degradation of a community - the picked and selected criminals of Great Britain. These were the people that Great Britain sent here - educated in her crowded streets amongst her starving masses New South Wales must be the university at which these scholars in vice and iniquity must finish their course of instruction. New South Wales must alone supply the college where these doctors in crime can take their last degree. (Cheers.) Here it was where the rubbish - the moral filth of Great Britain - must be shot; but the colonists at least had done their duty and he congratulated them upon it. Out of the Legislative Council and in the Council they had refused to become parties to this oppression and now that it was forced upon them they met indignantly to protest against it. It was true that in the Council the opinion of the representatives of the people had been silently asserted but it had been unanimously asserted for he could not call the miserable minority in the Council that differed from the people on this great question worthy the title of an opposition. (Cheers.) Those who were really opposed to the renewal of transportation had done their duty - they had not given up one point. [248] Day after day they had been called upon to yield up something. Overture after overture had been made to Mr. Cowper and himself by his honorable and learned colleague Mr. Wentworth for some compromise. (Groans for Mr. Wentworth.) But they had taken their stand - they had felt that the people were with them; and thanks to the noble declaration which the people had made on this question that stand had been maintained and the perfidy and insult which had been endeavoured to be perpetrated had been met and repelled. (Cheers.) But he looked not on this question by itself alone - he looked at it in connexion with another question in which the liberties of the people of this colony were almost equally concerned. A question on which as on this he hoped the colonists would make themselves heard. He viewed this attempt to inflict the worst and most degrading slavery on the colony only as sequence of that oppressive tyranny which had confiscated the lands of the colony - for the benefit of a class. That class had felt their power - they were not content to get the lands alone without labour they were worthless and therefore they must enrich them with slaves. (Great cheers.) He (Mr. Lowe) warned them not to be deluded by the simple aspect which the question had hitherto borne when argued by those whose interests were involved in maintaining the system. He was for the liberty of all - and he protested not only against deluging the colony with crime but the insidious attempt to introduce serfdom and slavery amongst them. This was not a question of the injury which the 250 felons on board the Hashemy could do the colony. They would perhaps cause but little evil - but it was a question - a question in which they had a right to be heard in protest - whether the inhabitants of this colony should be subjected to the contamination of trebly convicted felons and whether they should submit to a measure which was necessary to fill up the confiscation of their lands. (Cheers.) He therefore contended that those who branded the people of the colony with mere worldly selfishness in the part they had taken on this question did them injustice. It was not the mere fear of competition amongst operatives that now united them on - this question; it was not a mere breeches pocket question with the labouring classes though it might be with the employers. [249] It was a struggle for liberty - a struggle against a system which had in every country where it had prevailed been destructive of freedom. (Cheers.) Let them not be deluded by this insidious attempt. Let it go home that the people of New South Wales reject indignantly reject the inheritance of wealthy shame which Great Britain holds out to her. That she spurns the gift deceitfully gilded though it be - that she spurns the degradation however eloquently it may be glozed over. Let them send across the Pacific their emphatic declaration that they would not be slaves - that they would be free. Let them exercise the right that every English subject had - to assert. his freedom. (Cheers.) He could see from that meeting the time was not far distant when they would assert their freedom not by words alone. As in America oppression was the parent of independence so would it be in this colony. The tea which the Americans flung into the water rather than pay the tax upon it was not the cause of the revolt of the American States; it was the unrighteousness of the tax - it was the degradation of submission to an unrighteous demand. And so sure as the seed will grow into the plant and the plant to the tree in all times and in all nations so will injustice and tyranny ripen into rebellion and rebellion into independence. (Immense cheering.)  The protest was then put and passed unanimously.  Dr. AARON: It would be both bad taste and bad policy in him to detain them at any length on such a day with any speech on the resolution which he had been deputed to move. Still on a subject like this he was not prepared to give entirely a silent vote. He was the father of a family in this colony and he felt it was the duty of every one who stood in that situation to resent the insulting proceedings to which they had been exposed and to protest against the tyranny of any minister of the Crown who could lend such proceedings his countenance and assistance. (Cheers.)  1. That it is the urgent request of this meeting that the Local Government do send the prisoners arrived in the Hashemy immediately back to England and if necessary at the expense of the colony. [250]  Mr. MACKINNON (member of Council for Port Phillip) could not allow the magnificent demonstration which the people of Sydney had made in the expression of their abhorrence of any return to the system of transportation without assuring them that the feelings of the people of Port Phillip were with them to a man. (Cheers.) He would tell them more. He would tell them whatever the sentiments of the squatters in this district might be the squatters of Port Phillip wanted no convict labour. True they did want labour but it was free labour not labour such as that which had now been sent into this port - labour that must be coerced and which would again revive through the land the disgusting sound of the clanking fetter and the lash of the cat-o'-nine tails. He had felt it his duty to say these few words and to state that on every occasion to the utmost of his power would he resist the degradation to which the home government had sought to subject them.  Mr. HENRY. PARKES had been appointed to second the resolution which had been proposed to them by Dr. Aaron. He belonged to the largest class of men in the colony - the working class. After the speeches they had already heard - it would be unwise in him to detain them longer save for one word in behalf of a class to whom as yet no allusion had been made - but who were most unjustly dealt with in this matter. Let him ask that meeting did the one thousand four hundred emigrants. now afloat on the waters of Port Jackson believe when they left Great Britain that they would find a convict ship in the midst of the ships that brought them hither? Would they had they dreamt of such a thing have sacrificed all home ties and volunteered to degrade themselves? In the colony the whole question had been discussed over and over again but these immigrants when they went on board could know nothing of the injustice to which they were about to be subjected. It was urged by the Secretary of State that the colony wanted labour that these felons were sent in pity to them to supply their wants. The home government had been so exceedingly paternal as to provide for their necessities. It might also be with a similar paternal feeling that it had felt that as young women would grow up in the colony it was well and expedient to send out a ship load of husbands for them. [251] (Cheers.) He could only express his deep feeling of indignation at the insult that had been offered to the community at large and he would say the only remedy he could see - the only course consistent with justice to the colonists at large was that the convict ship and cargo should be sent back.  The resolution was then put and unanimously passed.  Mr. MICHIE: It was now his agreeable duty to propose to them the last resolution and he would venture to congratulate the meeting that the weather had been so unpropitious on that occasion. Many who had imagined that the in-clemency of the day would prevent this great demonstration were now undeceived. Some who hoped to sneer at the failure of this movement were now disappointed. Without any favourable circumstances to lend them adventitious aid the people of Sydney had shown themselves signally capable of the right performance of their duties. He had never known even Englishmen so well brave the rain which had fallen since that assembly met in the calm and peaceable assertion of their rights. (Cheers.) He hailed this meeting with great satisfaction for he looked upon it as a necessary demonstration of the determined resistance of the colonists to the measures of the home government with respect to the renewal of transportation. Those who had carefully read the speech of Earl Grey reported in the Times newspaper and copied into the Sydney Morning Herald of that day would have some idea of what manner of man they had to deal with in the English minister. He argues that England has a right to send out criminals to the Cape of Good Hope whether the people there are willing to receive them or not because it has cost Great Britain a million of pounds to put down the Kafirs - to prevent the Kafirs from cutting their throats. This was a specimen of British honesty of British liberty and lordly logic. The moral and social welfare of a community was to be made by an English statesman a matter of bargain and sale. But with regard to New South Wales Earl Grey had gone even further he had made a bargain with the colony - and had abruptly broken it - at least he had kept his own part of it only - the terms made by the colony being thrust aside altogether. This was the man they had to deal with and feeling how grossly the liberties and rights of the colonists had been infringed he rejoiced to see that even in a morning like that when the elements seemed so adverse the compacted thousands whom he saw before him could meet in peaceable but firm and manly protest against the invasion of their liberties. [252] It was a great and noble cause in which they were engaged and he must felicitate himself that he had been called on to take an active part in it. (Cheers.) He would now beg to move - That a deputation be appointed to wait immediately upon His Excellency the Governor with the Protest and Resolutions now adopted to request him to forward them to Her Majesty the Queen; and that the deputation consist of the following gentlemen viz. : - the Chairman Mr. Lowe Mr. Lamb Mr. Nichols Mr. Michie Dr. Aaron Mr. Parkes Mr. R. Peek Mr. Heydon Mr. Coleman Mr. Hawksley Mr. M.. Curtayne Mr. Knight Mr. E. MEncroe Mr. Pembroke Mr. Strong Mr. Ham Mr. Mullins Mr. J. R. Wilshire Mr. Simmons Mr. Jennings Mr. C. Kemp and Mr. Gilbert Wright.  Mr. PEEK seconded the resolution: It had been endeavoured by some to prove that those who had been actuated to the course that they had that day adopted were disloyal subjects. But the fact that they had met on such an occasion in sight of the very instrument of their oppression and degradation peaceably and calmly to protest against it showed sufficiently not only that they were loyal but they were extraordinarily loyal. (Great cheers.) They had seen the first convict ship arrive since New South Wales was pronounced free from the brand of a penal settlement. They might see one or two more yet come in but the colonists had declared by their movement that day that they would not submit to any persistence in the injustice which had been done to them. Truly had they been told that it was those only who were blinded by their own selfish interest that could wish again to see the colony made the receptacle of English criminals. He should not detain them with a speech; but would merely state that the injustice which they were now met to protest against was far more flagrant far more oppressive than that which had given birth to the American rebellion. (Great cheers.) [253]  The resolution was then put and passed unanimously.  The Chairman having vacated the chair and Robert Lowe Esq having taken the same a vote of thanks was enthusiastically given to Mr. Campbell.  The deputation went immediately to Government House but only six gentlemen were admitted the gates being closed against the others. The Private Secretary informed these six gentlemen that it would be necessary to forward a copy of the protest and resolutions to the Governor who would appoint a time to receive the deputation and return an answer. The protest and resolution were subsequently forwarded to his Excellency with a request that a time might be fixed when the deputation would be allowed to wait upon his Excellency but no answer to this communication was received last evening.   The meeting dispersed without any noise or tumult and the conduct of the people throughout was grave decorous and becoming.  The establishment of a Circuit Court is analogous to the institution of the Court of Assize in England which is composed of two judges of the superior courts of common law who are twice sent every year on circuits all round the kingdom to whom the duty is confided of superintending the trial of matters of fact as well as that of deciding matters of law and transacting other judicial business. If in England where time and distance are wonderfully shortened by steam and railway communication it is still deemed a great advantage that Circuit Courts should be held in order that the administration of the laws might be brought home to all the inhabitants of the land of far greater necessity and advantage may it be deemed that in this remote district from the seat of government this venerated institution of our native land should be established. [189]  Whether this court as a Circuit Court should be continued or whether for it in progress of time in this district rapidly rising into importance - a Resident Judge should be substituted I will obtrude no opinion: - but it is at least just and necessary that there should exist some court here in which all the laws to which the members of this community are amenable should be administered. Its establishment is the right of the community in analogy to the principle and practice in England of bringing the administration of the laws to the people's homes.  It is moreover a convenience and advantage in point of economy. Indeed from the impediments which great expense and the long absence of witnesses from home have hitherto presented it is to be apprehended this great evil has arisen - that only some cases of aggravated crime have been subjected to trial in Sydney whilst many offences that merited exemplary punishment have been committed from the prospect of impunity on which those who committed them calculated by reason of the difficulties in the way of trial created by the causes to which I have adverted. It cannot be commended yet it cannot be wondered at that many would prefer that serious injuries to property and even to person should altogether go unpunished rather than be subjected to the law's delay and the law's expense and the inconvenience of long absence from home incident of necessity to a journey to Sydney. The establishment of this court removes all difficulties and inconveniences of this nature.  The half-yearly appointed sittings may now be useful not only for the punishment of crime but for what is more desirable for its prevention - by deterring those who may be now hesitating on the brink of crime from plunging into its commission when they are aware and assured that there is now as easy a mode and as effective a machinery for bringing criminals to justice in Brisbane and thoughout the wide district of Moreton Bay as exists in Sydney - and that punishment will follow as quickly and as certainly on the track of guilt as in any town or county in the great country from which we have all come. The hope of impunity then from delay distance and expense that the criminal may hitherto have indulged in expires at the creation of this court today.  Fellow Colonists of New South Wales is it necessary after these explanations that I should now call upon you to join the Australian League to give freedom and independence to your adopted country? There is clearly nothing else worth agitating for in our present circumstances and be assured that if you do agitate for this great boon with earnestness and determination you will certainly obtain it. So long as we continue a dependency of England our condition will be that of a mere football kicked about at pleasure by every underling in Downing Street and condemned to utter insignificance as a community. (Strong expressions of assent.) But as a Sovereign and Independent State our noble city would be the flourishing capital of a great and powerful confederation - a confederation whose representatives would be respected and honoured in every nation in Christendom and which would ere long give the law to the boundless Pacific. (Much cheering.) As a mere colony we shall descend rapidly as we are now actually doing into insignificance and poverty and be pointed at with the finger of scorn by all free nations; but as a Sovereign and Independent State capital and emigration enterprise and moral worth would again flow to our shores the vast resources of our noble country would be rapidly developed and prosperity would again revisit and cheer our land. (Loud and protracted cheering.)  Natives of New South Wales it cannot surely be needful to call upon you to join a League for the achievement of the freedom and independence of your native land. [420] You have hitherto even in the estimation of Great Britain herself been the tail of the world and every brainless creature of blighted prospects and broken fortunes from England with no personal merit but servility and no intellectual qualification but toadyism has been systematically placed above you even in this the land of your birth. Why it is a rule of the service under the present regime that no native of the Colony however able talented and meritorious he may have proved himself can be appointed by the Governor to any office under government with a salary above £100 a year. (Loud and indignant cries of Shame.) You have all heard I doubt not of our Public Educational Institutions going down and proving an utter failure one after another: but is there not a sufficient reason for such a calamity in this systematic exclusion of the native youth from all such offices and employments under Government as would create a demand for a superior education and call forth the talents and energies of an ingenuous mind? (Loud and indignant expressions of assent from all quarters.) In fact there is no career open for the native youth in this their own country under that vile system of government under which it is our calamity to live. (Continued expressions of approbation.) Unless they can get into a draper's shop or into a merchant's office as a junior clerk which it is generally very difficult for them to do or into a solicitor's office - in which case they will have to prowl about the Supreme Court for years together no very safe situation for a young man of unfixed principles - they must either go as shepherds and stockmen into the interior or open a butcher's shop or get a publican's licence for one or other of our Colonial towns expending their energies thenceforth in such trivial and contemptible pursuits as horse-racing boat-racing and cricketing. And what sort of cattle are those that are sent out as heads of departments here with the Secretary of State's brand upon them to live at our expense and to eat the fat of the land? Why as I told Lord Stanley once the Treasury benches of the late Legislative Council might with only one or at the utmost two exceptions have been styled with the greatest propriety the "Refuge for the Destitute". (Great laughter and cheers of assent.) But as a Sovereign and Independent State some native youth would in all probability rise to be one of the heads of the civilised world in- instead of being the very tail of it as at present and our country would forthwith assume one of the proudest and most influential positions on the face of the earth. (Great cheering.) Indeed there can scarcely be a limit set to the wealth and resources the power and the grandeur of the future Australian nation. From the South Cape of Van Diemen's Land to Cape York it will one day compromise a whole series of powerful states and its influence will be beneficially felt over the multitude of the isles of the Western Pacific. In short taking into account the vast galaxy of isles to the eastward and northward of Australia in addition to the extensive coasts of this great continental island itself I question whether even the United States of America will have a more extensive field of political power and of moral influence to expatiate over than will one day acknowledge the sovereignty of the United Provinces of Australia. [421] (Renewed and continued cheering.)  Sons of the soil! the die is cast!  And your brothers are nailing their flag to the mast;  And their shout on the land and their voice on the sea  Is "The land of our birth is a land of the Free." - (Loud cheering.) 