 It will be enough for me to state briefly that these clauses embody the following great principles: - Entire freedom on the part of the colony from taxation by the British government - a repudiation of the schedules reserved by act of the British Parliament - the entire disposal of all the revenues of the colony whether ordinary casual or territorial - the control of the Customs Department with the power as it were to use the pruning knife in cutting down that department - the investment of all colonial patronage in the Governor for the time being and the Executive Council - the plenary power of legislation so long contended for by the Council and the want of which has so often impeded the passing into law of measures which were essential to the welfare of the country and as a necessary consequence of these responsible government; and in consideration of all these privileges gained by the colony the bill gives to her Majesty a civil list securing certain fixed salaries to the different heads of departments of the public serviced to these rights and these concessions there did not seem to be any opposition either in the House or out of doors and I shall therefore proceed at once and confine myself to those clauses only the introduction of which into the Bill has subjected me to so much obloquy and abuse. These are simple and few in number and involve first the principle that the Constitution to be fixed by the measure shall not be altered except by a majority of two-thirds of the members of both houses of the Legislature; second the distribution of the eighteen representative members required to bring the number of the House of Representatives up to its present number when the eighteen members who now hold seats as nominees are taken away; and third- the composition of the Upper House which the 4th and 5th clauses of the Bill propose to erect. These three points I take it are the battle field of this question and it is therefore unnecessary for me to refer to anything else. On the first of these points in respect to which so much clamour has been made I will state in passing that there is not a single paltry joint stock company in the colony in which the same principle is not introduced. [...] It was the object of the committee who framed this Bill to frame a Constitution in perpetuity for the colony - not a constitution which could be set aside altered and shattered to pieces by every blast of popular opinion. What community of men could I ask he brought to live together under such a government as this would be? [336] What security for person or the rights of property or the administration of the law or social order would there be under such a Constitution? [...] Having examined objection No. 1 I will now proceed to objection No. 2 relating to the distribution of the additional representative members. A great deal of ridicule and abuse has been cast on the measure because of this clause and also on the existing Electoral Act because it is urged it gives preponderance in the Legislature to one class.  I am firm in the conviction that the representation of the country should be based on or proportioned to not the mere population but the great interests of the country; and it should be so proportioned that no one interest shall have a preponderating influence over any other. Now I contend that the pastoral interest under the Electoral Act has no such preponderating influence. That interest is incomparably the largest the most important interest in the country and I hope it will continue so for ages. (Cheers.) I am quite confident if the country is to continue to grow great and wealthy this great interest must continue to flourish. It is for pastoral purposes alone that we can ever turn to successful account the illimitable wilds which exist in the interior of the colony and which are under the system so much and so falsely cried down producing annually millions of income to the colony. (Cheers.) Discontinue this system give up pastoral pursuits and this enormous amount of income will be simply destroyed. This would be a policy so preposterous that even the wildest democrat if he understood the practical bearing of the question would denounce it. [...] The wealthy class of the city consists chiefly of these men of business - these lords of the Exchange as they call or think themselves. (Great laughter.) There is my hon. friend from Darlinghurst (Mr. Barker) who is a manufacturer in a certain sense; he manufactures flour out of grain. My hon. friend the member for the Sydney Hamlets (Mr. Smart) is in the same position. Then there are some leather manufacturers one or two brewers an iron founder or two and these I believe with some trifling exceptions are all. There is really nothing to represent here except a large mass of labour. (Great laughter.) [...] This brings me to those clauses of the Bill which out of doors were more immediately the cause of the opposition against the measure and which are the main subject-matter of grievance in the petition which has been presented this afternoon. These are the clauses which provide for the composition of the Upper House and which had raised an unexpected clamour against the Bill out of doors. [...] I sincerely hope that the Constitution the Council is about to frame will be a constitution that will be a lasting one - a conservative one - a British not a Yankee constitution. (Loud and prolonged cheers.) I hope that it will be one under which in all times to come the people of New South Wales will repose in safety and security and that it will assimilate in every possible respect with the constitution of the glorious fatherland. (Loud cheers.) [337] [...] If the Council would look to the whole range of the British colonies - throughout the West Indies and British America - and if it were considered that the nominee principle was universal throughout this extensive range - that it has ruled for nearly two centuries in some for a great length of time in all that so far as can be collected from the best authorities on colonial matters from the opinions of the local press a single objection has never been raised against it; surely these are facts which ought to have great weight here. (Hear hear.) [...] Seeing therefore that the form of constitution now proposed for New South Wales exists. and has long existed in the wide range already mentioned that no complaints (excepting those arising from the jealousies of antagonistic races) have been made against it I would ask the Council whether this colony is now to give up the great boon which it so earnestly prayed for four years ago? (Hear hear.) [...] And this brings me to the important principle involved in the hereditary clauses of the Bill. As the report of the select committee states. they are framed to a certain extent in accordance with analogous clauses to be found in the Imperial Act 3 George III c. 31 for making more effectual provision for the government of the province of Quebec. The principle of conferring an hereditary right of being summoned to the Legislative Council upon those upon whom the Sovereign might confer hereditary titles rank or dignity is therein set forth and was maintained by Pitt Burke Wilberforce and all the great statesmen of that day except Fox whose attempt to defeat the measure failed and the clauses were carried enacting that the Sovereign might confer hereditary titles upon the colonists of Quebec coupled with seats in the Upper House which were to descend to their sons. The design of Pitt was to establish an hereditary class in Quebec upon the same principle as that which rules in the case of the peerage of England. But in this age of the world the committee were prompt to see that this hereditary right to seats in the Council could not be maintained for it very often happens that the most brilliant fathers have the most stupid sons; and as talent and ability are not naturally hereditary it could not for a moment be proposed that the seats of those upon whom hereditary titles might be conferred should descend to those who should come after them. [...] an Upper House framed on this principle whilst it should be free from the objections which have been urged against the House of Lords on the ground of the hereditary right of legislation which they exercise would lay the foundation of an aristocracy which from their fortune birth leisure and the superior education which these advantages would superinduce would soon supply elements for the formation of an Upper House modelled as far as circumstances will admit upon the analogies of the British Constitution. [338] Now it must be borne in mind that the principle of electing a portion of the Upper House from those holding hereditary titles is one which cannot be carried into practice for the next forty or fifty years; it is to be seen therefore that the committee proposed to sow the seed of an institution which will have ample time allowed it to grow to maturity. (Cheers.) And it is also to be remembered that this principle of forming a house the one portion patented by the Sovereign and the other elected by those holding hereditary rank obtains at present in the House of Lords in the case of the election of Scotch and Irish peers upon whom no hereditary right of legislation is conferred but only the hereditary right of election. (Hear.) When a generation having this hereditary right amongst them arises here I (recalling the menaces of a certain portion of the colonial press its tendencies to democracy its recklessness of consequences) predict that it will be found a good and stable bulwark necessary for the defence of good government and conservative institutions. A powerful body will be formed of men of wealth property and education - men not raised from any particular section of the community but front every class that has the energy to aspire to rank and honour. (Hear.) [...] Here are no poor no middle class in the sense in which these words are used at home; all are rich; yet what do people aspire to here who having accumulated perhaps £50000 or £100000 do not care to pursue the drudgery of money - making any longer? I will tell the Council: they aspire to a speedy migration to other lands seeing it is better to themselves and families to build up homes where the democratic and levelling principles so rapidly increasing here are scouted; and where there are high and honorable pursuits anti distinctions to which the children of the prudent may aspire. (Loud and prolonged cheers.) Who would stay here if he could avoid it? Who with ample means would ever return if once he left these shores or even identify himself with the soil so long as selfishness ignorance and democracy hold sway? (Renewed cheers.) And yet what a glorious country would this be to live in if higher and nobler principles prevailed; blessed with the most bounteous gifts of providence it affords in its rich and illimitable tracts happy homes for millions yet unborn. (Hear hear.) With regard to the clauses in question I know not the opinions of hon. members but I can only say that if they be not adopted the colony will be virtually disfranchised. (Loud cries of hear from all sides.) Why I ask if titles are open to all at home should they be denied to the colonists?  Sir I have said before and I repeat it that the great and insuperable objection to all these elective bodies is that they are inflexible; their numbers are unalterable and can neither be added to nor diminished. [339] The third estate of the realm can exercise no authority over them but the authority of dissolution. I have shown that that authority is not sufficient to preserve the vessel of the State from wreck - that the elective element doubly represented as it would be in any such Constitution must and will become too powerful to be controlled - and that under such a form of government the throne must give way. Sir I think that these arguments ought to be sufficient to convince the House and the country at large that this proposed elective Upper House is an innovation which we cannot safely admit. Yes sir it is an innovation we can never introduce without contemplating not in the far future not as my hon. and learned friend has stated but as an immediate or at least an approximate result the severance of our allegiance from the mother country and of our loyalty to the throne (hear hear and no no) - the severance of that ancient and glorious tie which binds us to our fatherland - that golden link which I trust will ever bind us to it - which those may sever or attempt to sever who hike but which I trust will be maintained for ages to come by a very large majority of the loyal and respectable portion of this community. (Loud cheers.) [...] But I would say sir is there not - to say nothing of large landholders - is there not a class peculiarly fitted for hereditary distinctions? a class which has been great and powerful in all ages and in all countries where it has-existed; which must continue to be great and powerful here as long as the great interior wilds of this country can be applied to no other purpose than the sustentation of sheep and cattle? Yes sir we have among us and we shall have among us to the latest generations our Shepherd Kings. And I believe that as they are a body peculiar to this colony so are they as a general proposition the body most fitted of all in the colonies - I mean the principal men among them - to receive these hereditary distinctions. I can afford to say this now because I can scarcely be called a squatter myself any longer.  But I am not inclined to persist in them if the opinion of this House should be against me. (Hear hear.) I am willing to give them up. The bill is a perfect measure without them. It will then still leave us a nominated Upper House - an element which I believe to be an essential and indispensable element in the Constitution - an element which though antagonistic at times and necessarily antagonistic because it exercises and has a right to exercise a veto on the legislation of the Lower House contains within it a principle without which I have shown there is no safety-valve and can be none in the British Constitution [...] Sir without inquiring how far a charge of this latter kind is true or false I deny the imputation altogether - I will not even admit that I commenced my life like the old gentleman whom my hon. and learned friend the member for the Northumberland Boroughs quoted last night a republican that I became in middle age a Whig and that I shall die a Conservative. [340] Sir at all events I shall die with Conservative principles; but however I may die I deny emphatically that I ever was a democrat or a republican. I was a Whig I admit till I was ashamed of Whigism. I was a Whig until that great Whig leader and despot - that man who played so many pranks with the colonies of the British Crown and with this colony in particular - Earl Grey and his faction converted me from Whigism. (Cheers and laughter.) In the wildest flights of declamation I have ever indulged in I defy anyone to say that I ever ceased to be an advocate for the British Constitution. What has been the uniform object of all the political battles I have fought but to confer such a Constitution on this country? It is fortunate for me that my consistency in this particular - the deep ardour and attachment that I feel and have ever felt to that Constitution can be established in other ways than by mere unsupported allegation.  COLONISTS!  Will you submit to be robbed of your rights? (Shouts of No.) A Committee of the Legislative Council has passed a New Constitution for the colony by which it is proposed -   1. To create a colonial nobility with hereditary privileges. (Tremendous groans.)  2. To construct an Upper House of Legislature in which the people will have no voice. (Great disapprobation.)  3. To add 18 new seats to the Lower House only one of which is to be allotted to Sydney while the other 17 are to be distributed among the country and squatting districts. (Disapprobation.)  4. To squander the public revenue by pensioning off the officers of the Government at their full salaries thus implanting in our institutions a principle of endless jobbery and corruption. (Groans.)  5. To fix this oligarchy in the name of free institutions on the people irrevocably so that no future Legislature can reform it even by an absolute majority. (Groans.)  The Legislative Council have had the hardihood to propose passing this unconstitutional and anti-British measure with only a few days' notice and before it can possibly be considered by the colonists at large. (Great disapprobation.) [341]  Colonists! speak now or for ever hold your peace. (Loud cheering.)  [...] being in a figurative humour he might endeavour to make some of the proposed nobility pass before the stage of our imagination as the ghost of Banquo walked along in the vision of Macbeth so that we might have a fair view of these harlequin aristocrats (laughter) these Botany Bay magnificos (laughter) these Australian mandarins. (Roars of laughter.) Let them walk across the stage in all the pomp and circumstances of hereditary titles. First then in the procession stalks the hoary Wentworth. But he could not imagine that to such a head the strawberry leaves would add any honour. (Cheers.) Next came the native aristocrat Mr. James Macarthur he would he supposed aspire to the coronet of an earl he would call him the Earl of Camden and he suggests for his coat of arms a field vert the heraldic term for green - (great cheers and laughter) - and emblazoned on this field should be a rum keg of a New South Wales order of chivalry. There was also the colonial starred Terence Aubrey Murray with more crosses and orders - not perhaps orders of merit - than a state of mandarinhood (Loud laughter.) Another friend who claimed a colonial title was George Robert Nichols the hereditary Grand Chancellor of all the Australias. (Roars of laughter.) Behold him in the serene and moody dignity of that portrait of Rodias that smiled on us in all the public-house parlours - (loud laughter) - the gentleman who took Mr. Lowe to task for altering his opinions this conqueror in the lists of jaw and the victor in the realms of gab. It might be well to ridicule the doings of such a clique but their doings merited burning indignation - yet to speak seriously of such a project would too much resemble the Irishman's kicking at nothing it wrenched one horribly. (Laughter.) But though their weakness was ridiculous he could assure them that these pigmies might do a great deal of mischief. They would bring contempt on a country whose interest he was sure they all had at heart until even the poor Irishman in the Streets of Dublin would fling his jibe at the Botany Bay aristocrats. In fact he was puzzled how to classify them. They could not aspire to the miserable and effete dignity of the grandees of Spain. [342] (Laughter.) They had antiquity of birth but these he would defy any naturalist properly to classify them. But perhaps it was only a specimen of the remarkable contrariety that existed at the Antipodes. Here they all knew the common water mole was transformed into the duck-billed platypus and in some distant emulation of this degeneration he supposed they were to be favoured with a bunyip aristocracy.  Gold Anniversary Dinner  Mr. T. S. Mort in rising to propose the toast to "The Commercial Pastoral and Agricultural Interests of the Colony" said that although the discovery of our gold was of the very highest importance these interests were no less important to New South Wales. ... The Commercial Banking Company's recent dividend amounting to no less a sum than £100000 must convince everyone connected with mercantile affairs that the gold discovery promised to make the merchants of Sydney like those of the once magnificent cities of the Mediterranean - "Merchant Princes" (Loud cheers). ... Who could affix a limit to the resources of Australia? (Hear hear). Who that had sons before the gold discovery had any other resources than to send them to tend sheep in the interior or to send them to Europe? Now a new state of things had arisen and the colonists of New South Wales were about to build a new world. They would encourage nay would raise manufacturers engineers and other skilled persons and what was done in the mother country would soon be done here. Consider the genial climate the rich arable soil the plains of pasturage the wonderful mineral treasures of New South Wales and then ask whether this indeed is not "the promised land". (Hear hear). ... To another and to a most important point he would next solicit attention. He had adverted to the good effects of the gold discoveries upon the colonists in their capacities as citizens and fathers. He would now emphatically refer to the value of their discovery in making good Christians. [183] (Hear). All the missionaries from all parts of the world who had so zealously laboured in the Islands of the South Seas for many years have done less than must inevitably be done in a very short time by the gold discoveries upon the great continent. Gold is the mainspring of commerce; commerce is the forerunner of civilization; and civilization is the handmaid of Christianity. (Loud cheers). Air - "Railway Galop".  It is no doubt a growing conviction of the necessity of qualifying the mass of the people to exercise wisely a power it is manifestly impossible to withhold from them which has stimulated so many of those occupying the high places of society to exert themselves in the advancement of popular education. The most serious and far-seeing thinkers of our day clearly perceive that the only wise means of averting anarchy is to teach the people their own interests - to co-operate with them in the attainment of them - and to qualify both them and the classes above them to perceive in how many ways their interests may instead of conflicting be made to coincide. The people may thus be rendered not only a harmless but a highly beneficial conducting channel of political power - just as the same instrumentality by which a powder magazine may be exploded may under the guidance of a wiser art be made to work an electric telegraph.  While the whole world and especially that portion of it which speaks our own language is pressing forward in this glorious career it is surely not for Australia with her golden resources and her highly paid labourers to lag behind in the race. Shall mechanics with incomes equal to those of the middle classes of other countries remain content with their former pittance of education and intellectual advantage? No latitude of popular privileges whether equalling or exceeding those of the mother country can ever afford any real dignity or advantage unless accompanied by the knowledge which qualifies for its intelligent exercise - which will enable you to appreciate the exertions of the honest public servant - to penetrate the disguises of the artful demagogue who would flatter you for his own sinister ends - to check the rashness of the merely speculative politician - to take enlightened views of the great questions affecting our social welfare - to submit cheerfully to regulations entailing personal inconvenience where their ultimate social results can be shewn to compensate the sacrifice - to exercise self-control - and resist the temptation to expend augmented wages in mere bodily indulgence - to cultivate habits of courtesy and mutual forbearance - to reconcile the difficult but not contradictory duties of following with conscientious decision your own religious convictions and at the same time cherishing the most unalloyed charity towards all who differ from you - to take an intelligent part when your assistance appears requisite in the management of useful public institutions or furtherance of beneficial social movements - these and numberless other features in the character of good citizens must be established and generally prevalent among you before you can hope for any lasting social improvement. [184] And these are the qualities which such an association as this School of Arts (or as I may again call it the People's University) is calculated to promote.  Of political institutions this is not the place to speak unless it be to repeat that such Institutions as this are equally entitled to the support of those who dread and of those who rejoice in the advance of popular influence. Our mission is to quell the fears of the one by rendering the popular element innocuous - and to realise the hopes of the other by ensuring its efficiency and durability. A popular form of Government without an educated people is a dead shell cast on a beach with no living inhabitant - while a people truly educated will spontaneously form its own institutions as the nautilus forms its beautiful habitation from its own vital secretions adapted to its own shape growing with its own growth repaired and renewed by its own inherent powers whenever mutilated by accident or violence and floating its fragile inhabitant safe through all the storms of that same ocean which spurns the dead shell from its bosom to rot on the shore of oblivion.  The Attorney-General in opening the case pointed out to the jury that this was the first case of the kind which had occurred and it was their duty to decide with strict impartiality between the employer and the employed. Mr. Parkes he said deserved great credit for the promptitude with which he had resisted this attempt at coercion. Nothing could be more injurious than that the practice of striking for wages should be suffered to grow into strength in this colony. It must be nipped in the bud. Combinations either of employers or of the employed to oppress the other class were equally illegal. ... Either class could meet and discuss the rate of remuneration with a view to future operations but they could not interrupt or affect existing engagements. The defendants might have terminated their agreements by giving the term of notice (a fortnight) required by the custom of the trade and they might have lawfully arranged not to reengage unless their demands for increased wages were complied with. But it could never be tolerated that any set of men believing their employer to be in their power should determine upon leaving their employment at once unless he at once succumbed to them. ... It was for the benefit of workmen themselves as well as of the masters that this system of striking should be nipped in the bud. It was quite impossible that the colony could continue to progress in industrial prosperity unless there was harmony and confidence between employers and employed.  Henry Parkes proprietor and publisher of the Empire newspaper ... said he received on the 7th. January the following document from Cunningham (the father of the chapel) "Resolved that it is the unanimous opinion of this chapel that according to the recognised principles of the business and according to the unanimous opinion of the members of the profession in this colony we are justified in the demand (for more money for specialised work) now made and that the refusal of payment is tantamount to instant dismissal. We therefore agree to accept it as such and to discontinue working in this office until such time as our just demand is complied with." Witness caused the hands to be summoned by his overseer to meet him (witness) in his room. He there explained to them his willingness to withdraw the objectionable matter - the tabular form of setting up the land sales. He also pointed out that the amount involved was one of small importance not more than 35s in upwards of one hundred pounds and that he trusted wholly to the decision of his overseer. But he offered according to the principle laid down in Savage on printing [probably James Savage An Account of the London Daily Newspapers and the manner in which they are conducted... London 1811] to call a meeting of the employers and employed to settle the matter. [171] He insisted however upon the resolution so objectionable in its tone should be first withdrawn. One of the defendants proposed accordingly to take this course and Purcell seconded the proposition but Bone exclaimed that this was not the way to settle - they were contending for a principle and must have another meeting. . . They all left. . . A number of them were found in a public-house near the office and they sent word back that they would return if witness would pay the money and apologise for an expression which he had used characterising the movement and the resolution as an attempt to override his authority and to coerce him into compliance with their demands - equal to highway robbery.  Mr. Bone stated that whatever of prominence he had assumed in this matter had been forced upon him by circumstances. When he came to the Empire office he found it in a state of turmoil in consequence of the men not being prepared to assent to a code of laws which Mr. Parkes was desirous of having put in force. Before he had been in the Empire office one hour he found that it was a hotbed of discontent. He was not long allowed to remain neutral for the next day after his employment Mr. Parkes withdrew his code of rules and named six men of whom he (Bone) was one to assist in drawing up a code according to the London rules and practice. At this time Mr. McKelly (the overseer) was absent in Melbourne and finding on his return some changes he expressed his dislike of these changes in strong terms telling the defendant that "He would have none of his d- London notions." All attempts at arrangements were met with abuse and threats of dismissal. As to the.. . circumstances.. . which were conceived to militate most strongly against himself this defendant explained them thus: - He had resisted the proposition before Mr. Parkes to withdraw the resolution not because he wished in the slightest degree to perpetuate the misunderstanding but because he thought that if the resolution was to be withdrawn it should be withdrawn in the regular way and this proposition was decidedly irregular.  (The jury found a verdict of guilty against all the defendants.)  The Chief Justice said ... he felt called upon to make ... reference to an advertisement which he had seen in the newspapers purporting to come from the "Operatives of Sydney". According to this advertisement these parties made common cause with these defendants calling for the payment of subscriptions to indemnify them for the proceedings which had been instigated against them for this "alleged conspiracy". ... This in fact was a proceeding calling imperatively for the strongest reprehension from the Bench. The authors of this advertisement calling themselves the "operatives of Sydney" who had dared to make common cause with parties duly convicted and to set themselves against the law who had presumed to designate that as alleged which after a solemn investigation before a Court and jury had been found to be proved would if they could be brought to justice be well deserving of punishment for they had been guilty of a gross contempt not only of the authority of the court but of the very laws under the protection of which they live. No man would be safe if combinations of this kind could be permitted. And the very interests of these classes themselves required a maintenance of the law in its integrity for the labourer of today might be an employer of labour tomorrow.  These unskilled workers were not unionised. Despite the police attack the strike continued for another week.  At a meeting held at Glen Osmond in the room intended to be used as a reading room and Mechanics' Institute on Saturday the 12th. August 1854:  Mr. Arthur Hardy in the Chair. Present also Mr. Justice Boothby Mr. S. W. Bull.. . and several others.  Mr. Hardy opened the business of the meeting by stating that he had designated the building for the use of persons in his employment or living on his property. Neighbours and others having intimated their wish to participate in the benefits of the reading room he had much pleasure in acceding to their request. It was his wish that the subscribers should themselves take over the whole management of the Institution upon themselves. He only required one restriction which he thought requisite at first at all events for the well being of the Institution viz: that no person should have a right to join or remain as a member of the Institute without his (Mr. Hardy's) consent. Mr. Hardy stated at the same time his wish to make the Institution as generally useful as possible and expressed his belief that he would not have occasion to exercise the power he retained. With this reservation he placed the room at the disposal of the Institute on every week day evening for such hours as should be found most generally convenient.  It was resolved that the Institute should be called "The Glen Osmond Mechanics' Institute".  It was resolved that the entrance money should be five shillings and the subscription sixpence per week payment in advance and that where the head of a family paid the entrance money any other members of the same family under sixteen years of age should be allowed to subscribe without paying any entrance fee.  It was resolved that children under 12 years of age should not be admitted.  It was also resolved that youths under 16 years of age whose parents did not subscribe should be allowed to subscribe without payment of entrance fee.  It was also resolved that the Institute should be managed by a Committee of twelve and that three should form a quorum.  It was also resolved that the Committee should prepare a set of rules for the management of the Institution and submit them to a general meeting of the members to be held on Saturday evening next if possible and that the following should be included among the rules:  That no drinking cards or gambling be allowed on the premises; that chess draughts and dominoes be allowed but not for money; that no smoking be allowed. That the meetings on Saturday evenings be considered general meetings.  It was resolved that the thanks of the Institution be given to Messrs. Dutton Tomkinson. . . and Hardy for their donation of books.  (signed) Arthur Hardy  Chairman.  Why he had been selected to speak to the present resolution he knew not save that as a native of the Colony he might naturally be expected to feel something like real interest and to speak with something like real feeling on a question connected with the political institutions of the Colony. He would do his best to respond to that invitation to "speak up" and would perhaps balance deficiencies flowing from a small volume of voice by in all cases speaking plainly and calling things by their right names. He protested against the present daring and unheard-of attempt to tamper with a fundamental popular right that of having a voice in the nomination of men who were to make or control the making of laws binding on the community - laws perpetually shifting and changing the nature of the whole social economy of a given state and frequently operating in the subtlest form on the very dearest interests of the citizen on his domestic his moral and perhaps his religious relations. The name of Mr. Wentworth had several times been mentioned there that day and upon one or two occasions with an unwise tenderness a squeamish reluctance to speak plain English and call certain shady deeds of Mr. Wentworth's by their usual homely appellations simply because they were Mr. Wentworth's. Now he for one was no wise disposed as preceding speakers had seemed to tap the vast shoulders of Mr. Wentworth's political recreancies- "to damn him with faint praise and mistimed eulogy." He had listened from boyhood upwards to grey tradition to Mr. Wentworth's demagogic areopagitas - his speeches for the liberty of the unlicensed printing régime of Darling; and for these and divers other deeds of a time when the honourable Member for Sydney had to the full his share of the chivalrous pugnacities of five- and-twenty he was as much inclined to give Mr. Wentworth credit as any other man. But with those fantasias those everlasting varieties on the "Light of other Days" perpetually ringing in his ears he Mr. Deniehy was fain to inquire by what rule of moral and political appraisal it was sought to throw in a scale directly opposite to that containing the flagrant and shameless political dishonesty of years the democratic escapades sins long since repented of in early youth. The subsequent political conduct or rather the systematic political principles of Mr. Wentworth had been of a character sufficiently outrageous to cancel the value of a century of service. [52]  The British Constitution had been spoken of that afternoon in terms of unbounded laudation. That stately fabric it is true deserved to be spoken of in terms of respect; he Mr. Deniehy respected it and no doubt they all shared in that feeling.But his was a qualified respect at best and in all presumed assimilations of the political hypothesis of our colonial constitution-makers he warned them not to be seduced by mere words and phrases - sheer sound and fury. Relatively the British Constitution was only an admirable example of slowly growing and gradually elaborated political experience applied and set in action but it was also eminent and exemplary as a long history still evolving of political philosophy.   But as he had said before it was after all but relatively good for its wonderfully successful fusion of principles the most antagonistic. Circumstances entirely alter cases and he would again warn them not to be led away by vague associations exhaled from the use of venerable phrases that had what few phrases now-a-days seldom could boast genuine meanings attached to them.   The patrician element existed in the British Constitution as did the regal for good reasons - it had stood in the way of all later legislational thought and operation as a great fact; as such it was handled and in a deep and prudential spirit of conservatism it was allowed to stand; but as affecting the basis and foundation of the architecture of a constitution the elective principles neutralized all detrimental influences by conversion practically into a mere check upon the deliberations of the initiative section of the Legislature. [53]  And having the right to frame to embody to shape it as we would with no huge stubborn facts to work upon as in England there was nothing but the elective principle and the inalienable right and freedom of every colonist upon which to work out the whole organisation and fabric of our political institutions. But because it was the good pleasure of Mr. Wentworth and the respectable toil of that puissant legislative body whose serpentine windings were so ridiculous we were not permitted to form our own Constitution but instead we were to have one and an Upper Chamber cast upon us built upon a model to suit the taste and propriety of certain political oligarchs who treated the people at large as if they were cattle to be bought and sold in the market as indeed they were in American slave states and now in the Australian colonies where we might find bamboozled Chinese and kidnapped Coolies. And being in a figurative humour he might endeavour to cause some of the proposed nobility to pass before the stage of our imagination as the ghost of Banquo walked in the vision of Macbeth so that we might have a fair view of those harlequin aristocrats those Australian magnificos. We will have them across the stage in all the pomp and circumstance of hereditary titles. First then stalked the hoary Wentworth. But he could not believe that to such a head the strawberry leaves would add any honour. Next comes the full-blooded native aristocrat Mr. James Macarthur who would he supposed aspire to an earldom at least; he would therefore call him Earl of Camden and he would suggest for his coat of arms a field vert the heraldic term for green and emblazoned on this field should be the rum keg of a New South Wales order of chivalry. There was also the much- starred Terence Aubrey Murray with more crosses and orders - not orders of merit - than a state of mandarinhood. Another gentleman who claimed the proud distinction of a colonial title was George Robert Nichols the hereditary Grand Chancellor of all the Australias. Behold him in the serene and moody dignity of that picture of Rodias that smiled on us in all the public-house parlours. This was the gentleman who took Mr. Lowe to task for altering his opinions this conqueror in the lists of jaw this victor in the realms of gab. It might be well to ridicule the doings of this miserable clique yet their doings merited burning indignation; but to speak more seriously of such a project would too much resemble the Irishman "kicking at nothing it wrenched one horribly." But though their weakness was ridiculous he could assure them that these pigmies might work a great deal of mischief; they would bring contempt upon a country whose best interests he felt sure they all had at heart until the meanest m an that walked the streets would fling his gibe at the aristocrats of Botany Bay. He confessed he found extreme difficulty in the effort to classify this mushroom order of nobility. They could not aspire to the miserable and effete dignity of the worn-out grandees of continental Europe. There even in rags they had antiquity of birth to point to ; here he would defy the most skilled naturalist to assign them a place in the great human family. But perhaps after all it was only a specimen of the remarkable contrariety which existed at the Antipodes. Here they all knew that the common water-mole was transformed into the duck-billed platypus ; and in some distant emulation of this degeneracy he supposed they were to be favoured with a bunyip aristocracy. [54]  However to be serious he sincerely trusted this was only the beginning of a more extended movement and from its commencement he argued the happiest results. A more orderly united and consolidated meeting he had never witnessed. He was proud of Botany Bay even if he had to blush for some of her children. He took the name as no term of reproach when he saw such a high true and manly sensibility on the subject of their political rights; that the instant the liberties of their country were threatened they could assemble and with one voice declare their determined and undying opposition. But he would remind them that this was not a mere selfish consideration there were far wider interests at stake. [55]  Looking at the gradually increasing pressure of political parties at home they must in the not distant future prepare to open their arms to receive the fugitives from England Ireland and Scotland who would hasten to the offered security and competence that were cruelly denied them in their own land. The interests of those countless thousands were involved in their decision upon this occasion and they looked and were justly entitled to look for a heritage befitting the dignity of free men.   Bring them not here with fleeting visions and delusive hopes. Let them not find a new-fangled Brummagem aristocracy swarming and darkening these fair free shores. It is yours to offer them a land where man is bountifully rewarded for his labour and where a just law no more recognises the supremacy of a class than it does the predominance of a creed. But fellow-citizens there is an aristocracy worthy of our respect and of our admiration. Wherever human skill and brain are eminent wherever glorious manhood asserts its elevation there is an aristocracy that confers eternal honour upon the land that possesses it. That is God's aristocracy gentlemen ; that is an aristocracy that will bloom and expand under free institutions and for ever bless the clime where it takes root. He hoped they would take into consideration the hitherto barren condition of the country they were legislating for. He himself was a native of the soil and he was proud of his birthplace. It is true its past was not hallowed in history by the achievements of men whose names reflected a light upon the times in which they lived. They had no long line of poets or statesmen or warriors; in this country Art had done nothing but Nature everything. It was theirs then alone to inaugurate the future. In no country had the attempt ever been made to successfully manufacture an aristocracy pro re nata. It could not be done; they might as well expect honour to be paid to the dusky nobles of King Kamehamaka or to the ebony earls of the Emperor Souloque of Hayti.   The stately aristocracy of England was founded on the sword. [56] The men who came over with the conquering Norman were the masters of the Saxons and so became the aristocracy. The followers of Oliver Cromwell were the masters of the Irish and so became their aristocracy. But he would inquire by what process Wentworth and his satellites had conquered the people of New South Wales except by the artful dodgery of cooking up a Franchise Bill. If we were to be blessed with an Australian aristocracy he should prefer it to resemble not that of William the Bastard but of Jack the Strapper. But he trespassed too long on their time and would in conclusion only seek to record two things - first his indignant denunciation of any tampering with the freedom and purity of the elective principle the only basis upon which sound government could be built; and secondly he wished them to regard well the future destinies of their country. Let them with prophetic eye behold the troops of weary pilgrims from foreign despotism which would ere long be flocking to these shores in search of a more congenial home and let them now give their most earnest and determined assurance that the domineering clique which made up the Wentworth party were not and should never be regarded as the representatives of the manliness the spirit and the intelligence of the freemen of New South Wales. He had sincere pleasure in seconding the resolution confident that it would meet with unanimous support and approval.   What you say about the License Tax is all quite true; but I wonder that shrewd educated hard-working hard-headed men like yourself do not see that you are overlooking the greatest grievance of all the redress of which would include the redress of all other causes of discontent. Representative rights - good Government - a just system of taxation - security - independence - prosperity - comfort - happiness all these would be ours if we had our rightful share of the LAND; and if instead of leaving your holes to attend tumultuous meetings assembled on the narrow ground of a repeal of the License Tax you and all our brother diggers and brother laborers throughout the length and breadth of the Colony would unite for a better and nobler object and adopt the cry "HOMESTEADS FOR THE PEOPLE AND MANHOOD SUFFRAGE" there would soon be an end to the present delusive system of Sales by Auction and Cabbage Garden patches and Victoria would be for the Victorians and we should at last be A PEOPLE. For is it not a fact and a most lamentable fact that with our population of some 300000 souls we are not A PEOPLE in the true sense of the word but a mere accidental fluctuating aggregation of individual atoms wanting some strong principle of cohesion to bind us into a mass - each of us actuated only by his own selfish motives - without homes - without ties or attachments to the soil anxious only to get as much as possible and as quickly as possible out of the Colony and each other and then to leave it for some better governed country where the hard working industrious man of small capital can acquire land BY SELECTION in a locality that suits him at a low fixed price and in sufficient quantity to ensure the due reward of his industry - a peaceful and prosperous home and the permanent establishment of his family. [104]  And why should this be John? Why should we who have come 16000 miles to push our fortunes in this new world why should we who are its very life blood be thus cast from its bosom? It is because we have never been appreciated as we deserve to because when patient and quiet we are to be kept down - when discontented and agitated by oppression to be put down - because it is the policy of our rulers or rather the rulers of our rulers THE LAND OWNING AND MONIED INTEREST (a factious minority into whose hands the Government of the Colony appears to have been committed) to perpetuate the absurd Wakefield principle which was invented for the express purpose of preventing us rising above the condition of laborers. Above all having no legal representative in the present Legislature mockery as it is and having too much relied upon our professed advocates in the Press and the Council we have by them been misrepresented and betrayed. In fact because you dear John and I and most of us affect long beards and short pipes because we wear serge instead of broad cloth moleskin instead of kerseymere wide-a-wakes instead of "bell toppers". - because toiling hard from "dewy morn till day's decline" absorbed in the labors of our precarious occupation we have never yet made our power really felt or recognised as we can and must do those drones of the hive - THE MONIED INTEREST - who squeeze out of our labor the taxes their own property should bear have at last come to regard us in no other light than as a community of Aliens providentially supplied as beasts of burden to toil for their aggrandisement having no sympathies in common with them and having no rights but such as they choose to concede to us.  I want you John and through you all our fellow-diggers and fellow - laborers in Victoria to consider well this all - important subject - "THE APPROPRIATION OF THE LANDS OF THE COLONY" Let us recollect that we have an enormous extent of really good agricultural land uncultivated and unappropriated; that we are paying to our neighbors and foreigners for flour grain potatoes hay &c. the appalling sum of £2250000 a year; that for butter cheese and beer all of which we could and ought to produce for ourselves we are paying another million a year making altogether £3250000 to foreigners to supply us at exorbitant prices with these articles of prime necessity all of which I repeat ought to be raised within the Colony itself. Consider these figures; think of three millions and a quarter or over 800000 ounces of gold subtracted annually from the wages of the Colony and say if in the eyes of the world we must not stand convicted of insanity so long as this gross absurdity continues.  The only definite meaning which at present appears to have attached to the stupid cuckoo cry "Unlock the Lands" is put up the lands to auction in small lots and on this system the land is being doled out by the Government. Now in the first place the land thus sold with few exceptions may in its average quality be estimated as the very refuse of the public lands; in the next place the working-man who knows his own business and can alone judge of what will best suit him has no power to choose but must be thankful if he can get a piece wherever it suits the whim or convenience of the Surveyor-General to have an auction; and finally the man of small capital has to encounter a phalanx of competition in the purchase of land under the present vicious system. [105] In Melbourne the monied interest and the land jobbers compete with him for every acre. In the country he has not only the monied men but also the police magistrates their clerks commissioners officers of police and other local land jobbers created by the system all bidding against him and besides all this he has the competition of his own class. He has indeed a perplexing variety of choices. He may buy bad land at a low price or fair land at a high price; low-priced bad land that would be dear at a gift high-priced fair land which if he buys in a large quantity swallows up his capital and leaves him without the means of settling upon it properly - if in a small quantity condemns him to become a grower of cabbages or other perishable produce and affords him no prospect but that of being a poor man and a laborer for the rest of his days. What the industrious man requires is an ample sphere of action an area of land and of good land which he himself can select in a suitable locality of such an extent that he may be able to raise from it the nobler produce of the soil and by hard work and economy gradually bringing it into cultivation have the reasonable prospect of competence and independence. Another alternative the working-man certainly has; and that is not to attend the land sales at all and this is his wisest course. Let him keep his money and wait - he will not have to wait long.  The Land question is the cardinal subject for Australian statesmanship and it is one which because of the considerations surrounding it considerations flowing from physical characteristics of the country would imperatively demand the genius of a statesman of the very highest order. I claim such a settlement of this question then as shall - everywhere the necessities of the State require it - open up the public lands of the Colony to the industrial classes as shall place land easily within every man's reach not in theory but in point of fact and in the broad and true spirit of colonization in the spirit of that honest national policy which in the rulers of a new land make the building up of a nation the end and aim of Government. [57]  Meanwhile the interests based on pastoral pursuits have become so to speak one of the institutions of the country. However much I wish the present land regulations reformed even organically changed I shall demand for every genuine interest that has grown up under them equitable consideration and this on grounds not only as I have before remarked of abstract justice but of natural policy. As a great existing productive and commercial feature of the country I wish the pastoral interest to be fairly and wisely dealt with on a basis of severe justice but on a basis not a whit more extensive. The immigration question I regard as allied to that of opening the lands. Without effecting the latter any attempt at extensive and effective immigration I look upon as idle. Heretofore we have been mainly occupied in importing servants and labourers for the larger landholders. Our land regulations have virtually deprived us of the power of offering inducements to a class of respectable peasants in Europe who would gladly come here to become small prprietors - to be to us "the soul and the spirit the blood and the bone" of national strength and prosperity - to contribute each one by his particular effort to that general result which would make "the wilderness to blossom like the rose" - to give us besides consolidating our material prosperity those massive thinkers those rugged undaunted masters and confessors for truth and right which the bold yeomanry of every European land and the giant American States have brought forth.   For myself gentlemen devoutly could I have wished this day of my nomination as a member of your parliament for some years postponed. I would have wished to build myself into solid proportions of wisdom and learning. I would fain have known more of mankind ere I undertook to legislate for them. I would fain have abode longer in that atmosphere which Milton termed "the still and severe air of great studies." [58] But a crisis you tell me and I believe it is at hand or is rapidly approaching and you want me. When the signal fires are reddening the hills at midnight when the sharp tuck of the drum and the fierce taunting invitation of the trumpet are abroad is it for the recruit to plead that his drill is incomplete? Going down to represent your opinions as I shall on a question of the highest moment I shall do my best to serve the exigencies of the hour with a humble sense of my present inexperience but with no unworthy hope. I trust to hereafter lending a hand in my poor way to touch to great and beneficent issues the destinies of this "Land of the free whose kingdom is to come."   Mr. Deniehy resumed his seat amidst deafening and protracted bursts of applause.   Mr. GLEDDALL supported the resolution. ('That in the opinion of this meeting it is the duty and ought to be the object of the Land League to do all that lies in its power to return to Parliament members favourable to the fundamental principles of the League and this meeting pledges itself to support the League in carrying out the intention of this resolution.') He stated that the object of the meeting was to invite the people to join the Land League so that by the force of numbers by a powerful moral force they would be able to assert their own rights to obtain those rights and to secure them for themselves and children for ever. He invited the people to come round to the other side of the 'waggon' and enrol their names as members of the League. The Land Bill lately submitted to the Government by the Cowper Ministry was bad enough but the principles since enunciated by Mr. Cowper were even more condemnatory. He blamed the meeting last night because that it did not give a more patient and impartial hearing to the late members for the city but he trusted that they had derived a lesson from the exhibition. [335] The Land League was charged with dividing the liberal interest and thereby weakening the liberal cause. He denied that such was the effect of their present movement. They would strengthen the liberal interest and unite the truly liberal men but they did not want a liberal cause In name only they wanted a liberal cause in fact. They wanted Electoral Reform and nothing else (Cheers). What they wanted and what they must have was a wise and liberal land policy with an extension of their rights and privileges. They would not stop merely because they gained a victory over the squatocracy of the country - no they would go on and persevere in the good work till they had gained Electoral Reform on a broad and liberal basis. They would insist on laying down the fundamental principle of reform and then to carry it out. (Cheers). Unless they could procure men who would go into the House pledged to support those principles they would not vote for any. Mr. Cowper's principles were in direct opposition to the principles of the land league. (Cries of No no and Yes yes). It was those men who would support the re-election of Mr. Cowper that would be really chargeable with dividing the liberal interest. (Uproar).   They had been told by Dr. Lang that until they succeeded in wresting a wise and liberal land bill from those whose interests on that measure were opposed to theirs the city would continue to be overcrowded with an idle and an impoverished population overcrowded in a manner which had been not inaptly compared to a collection of damaged merchandise. They wanted a wise and liberal land measure one that would induce and hold out attractions to the people in the over populous cities and towns to disperse themselves over the country and to settle down on comfortable farms and homesteads. Mr. Cowper had proved himself opposed to the introduction of a measure of that kind. (Cries of 'No no' and 'Aye aye.') Mr. Cowper had told them that he was utterly opposed to free selection - that he was in favour of the auction system and he was followed in the same spirit by Mr. Dalley who also had announced himself opposed to the principle of free selection and was a supporter Of the auction system. Mr. R. Campbell too had enunciated similar principles and all three of them were in all other respects opposed to every measure of a liberal tendency. [336] (Uproar and cries of 'No no.') Upon the land question Mr. Cowper was diametrically opposed to Dr. Lang. (No no and Aye aye.) Dr. Lang had made his opinions upon this great question publicly known and he had stated that it was injudicious and highly inexpedient and a suicidal policy to reduce the land to five shillings an acre while this very reduction was the leading and principal feature in Mr. Cowper's Land Bill. The League called upon the people to unite together and to fight the battles of the country with the squatters who were arrayed against them and to contest every inch of the ground with them until they carried out a measure that would secure for themselves and their children the blessings of independence. It had been truly said that the land question was the great question at issue between them and if they did not now fight their own fight and assert their claim to equal privileges they would be trampled under foot for ever - (cheers) - the country would be swamped and its inhabitants would become the serfs of the squatters. He would not further refer to Mr. Cowper's policy but he would say that as long as he (Mr. Cowper) was at the head of a ministry they might not expect to see any liberal measure introduced into the Assembly. (Cheers and groans.) That gentleman had already betrayed the interests of the country and if they trusted in him again they would again be betrayed by him. The speaker concluded by calling on the meeting to join the League and to support it as well pecuniarily as with their countenance. He had much pleasure in supporting the resolution.  Mr. CRAMP advised the electors that they must take care whom they put into power. If they had not mustered there in thousands Mr. Cowper and his gang would have given the land away to the squatters. The land was for the people and the motto of the Land League expressed this. But it was the House of Representatives who had to do the work for them and it depended on whom they elected whether or not the principles they advocated should be carried into effect. [337]  He had no faith in a Parliament constituted as at present and they must go for equal electoral districts manhood suffrage and no property qualification. With these conditions they would be able to accomplish the objects they had in contemplation.  Mr. READ said he had supported Mr. Cowper but he had deceived him. He believed he had proved himself utterly incompetent to take the helm of affairs. (Loud cries of 'No' attended with three groans for Read and cries of 'he's drunk' and 'stop till you're sober' during which Mr. Read was checked and sat down.  MR. DENIEHY after a few remarks with regard to the importance of debating the subject promised to combat with the cry that had been raised out of doors as to the competency of the present House to deal with the bill. He was sorry to say moreover that several gentlemen had joined in that cry for whose intelligence and patriotism he had the highest respect. As to the competency of the Chamber he entirely concurred in the views of the Hon. Member for King and Georgiana that if they waited until they had a House representing an entire community of opinion they would never see the Land question settled. He looked upon this question as one which could only be settled by approximation in the same way that all other great reforms had been effected. If the people of England had waited for a Parliament embodying a community of opinion the Reform Bill and many other beneficent measures would have been still in the dim distance. On reflection it would be found that all great measures of national reform had been brought about progressively and by mutual concessions of opinion. The Hon. Member for King and Georgiana had pretended to argue that the principles of the Bill now before the House were the same as those of the late Ministry's Bill; but after all he was compelled to admit that the reduction in the price of land was really a new feature ; and he Mr. Deniehy contended that it was the most important feature that could be introduced into a. measure of the kind. In fact it was the only principle the Hon. Member for the South Riding had thought it worth his while to attack. Mr. Deniehy then proceeded to quote from authorities in support of his position and in answer to Mr. Donaldson and other members who had expressed similar views showing amongst other things that Mr. Donaldson had misquoted Blackstone with respect to the origin of property etc. He Mr. Deniehy contended that it was the sacred duty of statesmen in dealing with a question of such magnitude to give the preference to agriculture for it was that which mainly gave a love of home and country and promoted industry thrift and happiness throughout a community. He said this without in the slightest degree desiring to damage the pastoral interest which at present he admitted produced the chief staple of the Colony. The real issue to be fought out by this Bill was not against the squatters as a class but against the greedy capitalist who sought to monopolise the entire lands of the Colony and to deprive posterity of their fair inheritance. He was surprised that hon. members had brought against the Attorney-General (Mr. James Martin) the charge of having expressed an opinion equivalent to this - that the measure now before the House would be considered as final by the Government. Now to have only imagined that the lion. and learned gentleman could have broached such a doctrine as this would be to believe that that gentleman possessed a greater amount of impudence than Attorney-Generals were usually in the habit of possessing and that members of that House were greater fools than ever were any jury that the honourable learned and exceedingly aggressive member would have to address because in anything that House could do there could be no finality as regarded their successors. What the honourable and learned member had intended to say was this that the arrangements should be considered final as far as the contract was concerned. The terms of that contract were defined in the present Bill and no one could expect to find better or fairer terms than were there proposed. [59] [60]  Alluding to the speeches of Mr. Holroyd and Mr. Faucett he combated the objections urged against the Bill by those hon. members. For himself he was prepared to support the Bill almost solely on account of the proposed reduction of the upset price of land to 5s. an acre as he considered that it had hitherto been kept up to a price that was all but prohibitory.   The proposed change was at all events one for the better in the present state of things and in the clauses which in conjunction with his hon. friend Mr. John Robertson he intended to introduce to the House that proposal would not at all interfere with the provisions of the Bill. It would touch none of its vital principles but merely afford additional facilities to the people for acquiring land.   He had now only to express the hope that the Ministry and the House would faithfully carry out the sentiments so generally expressed that they should do the greatest good to the greatest number and that step by step they would proceed in the business of the legitimate settlement of the country; throwing open the lands but jealously guarding the rights that existed under lease for in such means and in such alone they would find the best elements of civilisation for the mighty tracts of country now waste solitary and unoccupied.   It is a very shallow wisdom and slender knowledge of the world as well as mistaken expediency for anybody to resist the realisation of genuine self-government here or in any other community at all fit to receive it. [331] For the consolation of those then who deplore while they feel they cannot prevent this consummation in Victoria let us recal the established fact that self-government is by incomparable odds the most potent engine for developing and elevating the intellectual and moral condition of the people - surpassing all other machinery for the purpose by as long odds as the steam-engine surpasses all anterior methods of locomotion. This is no vague assertion no rhetorical vaunt but a distinct accredited established fact - incontrovertible as a problem in Euclid and tangible to human experience as the steam-engine we have adduced for a comparison. Democracy or self-government is sought by the people as a means to an end - as a lever for them to improve their physical and mental condition. But immediately on being attained it becomes still more powerful and useful for this purpose - it becomes more than a lever in their own hands for it ensures for this same end (viz. the popular development) the ardent cooperation of all the other classes including the men who most obstinately resisted its original concession. That self-interest which always sways bodies of individuals is the occasion of this. When power is once placed in the hands of the masses it forthwith becomes the interest without exception of every man in the country to help and press on all possible means for humanising and enlightening the humbler classes and for giving them a solid material interest in the country where they all dwell together. When every man has a voice in the State it is an important matter with his neighbour that he shall possess intelligence how to exercise. it and that his animus in exercising it shall be in accordance with the common welfare not against it. Where all are shareholders in the Government it is manifestly the universal interest that all shall be shareholders in social advantages also. As in mutual insurance companies each member feels his own position involved in the prosperity or decadence of the other members and of the society at large so also in a democracy. The rich man is then anxious like the poor man himself that the latter should have a stake in the country to make him conservative of its interests; and he is as anxious as the philosopher that the schoolmaster should penetrate efficiently into every corner of the land because he fears the mischief of ignorance in a man who has a hand as well as himself in the management of the community. [332] In a word when by democracy universal suffrage real representation self-government the public interests at large are substituted in state affairs for class or individual interests everybody is anxious that everybody else should have a zeal for the national welfare by having a share in it They are all embarked in the same ship and each person feels his success and safety ensured by the universality of zeal and intelligence: in the ship's company. It is this valuable community of interest in a democracy which gave rise to the very appropriate appellation of 'Common wealth.' When a nation is at all fit for it as ours confessedly is the most genuine and thorough self-Government is therefore: the most potent and rapidly-working lever which can be applied to the moral intellectual and material elevation of a community.  Observant travellers in America speak of the operation there of this natural law of community of interest resulting from community of Government. There the man of property is anxious that all shall become men of property that they may have reason to be equally conservative with himself; and the man of education is anxious that all shall become educated that they may have the enlightenment and discretion which he has.  How different the case is in an absolute monarchy or an oligarchy! There the individual or the class monopolising power dreads the diffusion of property which would give the masses heart and strength to insist on a partnership in Government and dreads that diffusion of education which would make them discontented with an abject lot and which would teach them how to redress it. In a country thus governed the interest of the despot or oligarchy is against the people; in a democracy the interest of everybody is with the people.  This is the cause why in every corner of the world and in all ages democracies (when people were developed enough for such form of government) have progressed so fast. [333] The happiest most enlightened and most thriving communities of the middle ages were the free cities of the Lombard League of the Hanseatic League and of Flanders. The democracies of old Greece produced the most magnificent race of human beings the world has yet contained - men to whom we owe the most glorious ideas which human nature has expressed and the noblest examples ever exhibited in every path of greatness. It was democracy which in their narrow mountain land developed the sons of Hellas to the highest pitch of human perfection.  Let us then hear no more imbecile querulousness at our rapid advances in self-government We have no despot no oligarchy no ascendant race or class and therefore there is not even the excuse of selfishness in opposing popular self-government. The question must be considered on its abstract merits; and we have just reminded our readers what these merits are. If we were unfit to be entrusted with honest self-government as the degenerate Creoles and half-savage Indians and Negroes of South America are unfit there would indeed be rational ground of objection. But in simple truth we are far better adapted for this prerogative of civilised man than any one of the most refined nations of the Old World. Our people are as a matter of fact the picked men of Europe; and as a consequence intelligence enterprise energy and spirit are immeasurably more universal here. And yet with all these elements of popular strength and the self-consciousness of it where is there a community more orderly? Half-a-dozen policemen on any one of the gold-fields suffice to preserve tranquillity among forty or fifty thousand diggers congregated from every country of the globe! Could all the writers and orators in the world strike out among their conjoined wits a single argument more eloquent than this simple fact?  How ridiculous then for some of our ancient friends to indulge in maudlin jeremiads over the dangers of Reform! The occasional grumbler among us cannot resist and it only displays his folly and his ignorance to deplore. Does he wrestle with nature and the laws of God? Can he check the natural and harmonious transition of the sapling into the tree of the brooklet into the river of the child into the man? [334] Can he persuade us to dispense with printing the telegraph or the compass? When he succeeds in getting us to renounce those things he will succeed in getting a vigorous intelligent self-reliant community to postpone or forego that other mighty lever of human development - Democracy.  He (Mr. Deniehy) held the opinion that in a young country like this every citizen who paid taxes let his position be what it might had a right to vote for a representative in the government of the country. He did not base that right upon such abstract theories of representative government as those brought forward by hon. members on the opposite side of the House. When hon. gentlemen pointed out to them the examples of Grecian democracies and the danger of putting large powers into the hands of the populace they had forgotten to tell them there was not the slightest similarity between the popular institutions of those days and the representative system of England. The former were the primary assemblies of the people and were often wrought to violent and hasty action by fiery and intemperate orators; and the great difference was that the latter the representative system provided for the election of representatives who should calmly deliberate for the masses. Whatever might be the character of individuals forming a constituency it was not likely to affect that of a representative; and hon. members would hardly contest what had been said by a high authority "that no man however ignorant when called upon to vote would do so in support of one whom he considered equally uneducated or low in character." And this formed the sure safeguard of representative institutions. As to the statement supported on the authority of Sismondi that the ancients enjoyed popular power and free institutions in the highest perfection; and the argument founded thereupon - that if they were now taken as models or guides nothing short of national ruin could be expected - he might say that Socrates Plato or Demosthenes had as much idea of representative government as they had of the Acts of the Apostles. Turning to America it was positively painful to hear hon. members on the other side of the House so anxious to depreciate the men chosen by the popular voice there some of whom had been of the most distinguished ability and irreproachable character. Amongst those might be named Webster Clay Calhoun and others almost as eminent and the loftiness and the purity of the principles by which those men were actuated was shown in the choice of such statesmen for Ministers at foreign Courts as Hunt Everitt Irving and Buchanan. So far as regard to character ability and attainments was concered she set a noble example to England by exercising what was purely a patronage of worth. Into any young country it was the duty of the Government to welcome new-comers and put them in possession of the rights and responsibilities of citizenship and that was to be done by giving them the franchise; and he believed that in such a place where a man lived by the reward of labour none would wish for a destructive or revolutionary policy. But they had striven too long and suffered too sorely under the clique and caste system in England not to wish and strive for something better in the land where they sought refuge ; and it was the solemn and sacred duty of legislators to prepare for them a fair field where there was no favour. The real value of such a measure as the present was that it would be the preliminary to a Land Bill and it was possible that in view of its affecting that subject the foolish outcry of revolution had been raised. He would vote for the second reading; and he had never before recorded his vote with such entire satisfaction to himself because he felt that he was discharging his duty to the country as a citizen as a representative to those who had sent him there and to himself as a man a husband and a father. [61] [62]  MR. DENIEHY said he was surprised to hear hon. members asking for a postponement of so important a Bill after they had expressed their convictions that the subject was one which ought to be dealt with at once. Those hon. gentlemen who desired this measure withdrawn in order that a prohibitory Bill might be introduced could not fail to see that they might attain their object by moving in committee that the amount levied be raised from £3 to £10 to £20 or £30. In consequence of the discovery of gold in the country we were threatened by an overwhelming influx of barbarians men of low social and mental development and given to the in dulgence of vices unfit to be named by a decent man. If this immigration continued on a large scale it would impart to the country a barbarous and degraded aspect and the colonial descent would be of decidedly inferior caste. The simple question was this - The country stood upon the brink of a great disaster and it naturally looked to its Parliament to check that disaster; and the Legislature had a right to deal with the matter on the grounds of policy and public expediency. He Mr. Denichy saw no more injustice in preventing the landing of this degraded race who would not only lower and demoralize but also endanger the safety of the country than he saw in stopping the "running" of a cargo of contraband opium or brandy. He must say that opposition to the Bill came with a very bad grace from hon. members; but they always had to dread a latent and illicit hankering after the introduction of inferior races for the purpose of obtaining cheap labour. They had seen attempt after attempt made to bring here the Coolie and the Eurasian. He had much pleasure in supporting the second reading of the Bill ; and if hon. gentlemen were sincere in their expressions of the desirability of passing the measure without delay they would to a man vote for the second reading and make it prohibitory as they pleased when in committee. [63]  MR. DENIEHY after warmly thanking the electors for the great honour they had done him in a second time returning him for their county said that had it not been for the approaching battle on the great subject of electoral reform and the present ominous state of affairs it was questionable whether he would have offered himself for re-election. At very great personal sacrifice indeed at the risk of absolute ruin he had entered the Legislature at all; and as a professional man resident in the country his continuance in Parliament would be impossible were it not for certain changes in his private affairs which he contemplated making. He had entered the Assembly at a crisis for the purpose of doing what as an Australian he considered his duty to his country and he had done it.   In February last they had sent him into Parliament to aid in the removal from office of Mr. H. Watson Parker's Government. Ousted that Ministry accordingly was and he (Mr. Deniehy) should for the present have rested satisfied with the share in the good work did he not see that a season more critical than any since the inauguration of responsible government had come upon them. That had come to pass which was more to be feared than all the combinations of squatterdom. There was a disintegration of the popular party. The people had to some extent broken away from and turned upon their old friends and leaders - had for one error of governmental policy trampled upon the loyal and intrepid services of long years in their cause. The people's enemies had been favoured with a consummation they had never even dared to pray for. The popular foe he believed had uniformly looked to their own special strength for victory not to that more potent force disunion and strife in the people's camp and a violent hand raised by the masses against the first Ministry pledged to reform because its first measure happened to be defective. He had a right to speak in this tone because he was one of those who strove to impart into the Cowper Ministers' Land Bill what would have met a very just and very equitable demand the people had made and he was one of those who had led the movement which caused the withdrawal of the Bill. He therefore felt it was a time when the people wanted the assistance of every true friend - of every honest and intelligent man who loved his country who had its best interests at heart and he had again come forward. He would for a moment advert to some remarks concerning his conduct in connection with the Land Bill which had appeared in one of the local journals. He had with reference to this been branded as joining a band of conspirators against his country's well-being as falling into the ranks of place hunters and turning around at the last moment to cover what he found to be a false move by endeavouring to introduce popular clauses into the Bill. In first addressing the House on Mr. Cowper's Bill which though extremely defective he looked upon as a good beginning as fraught with benefit by its simple enactment of reducing the price as inserting the wedge into the present pastoral system he had stated that he would seek in committee to introduce several new provisions into the Bill. [64]  The Selection clauses prepared by his honourable friend the present Minister for Lands and Works embodied these principles in their entirety; and it is within the knowledge of the recent Member for the Southern Boroughs Mr. Murray that immediately after the second reading of the Bill Mr. Robertson himself had declared his intention of infusing if possible into the measure a selection principle to co-exist with the auction system and had several interviews on the subject with Mr. Murray then Secretary for Land and Works. It was but bare justice to Mr. Murray to say that he was in favour of the proposed clauses. With the sober caution of an astute statesman he had intimated his fear of experimentalising but stated at the same time his thorough readiness to support the provision if they could show him warrant for it in the land legislation of America which he Mr. Murray regarded as one of the most pre-eminently successful of policies. Mr. Robertson and himself Mr. Deniehy undertook to produce American precedent for the principle; but so sincere was Mr. Murray in his expressions that he himself was the first who produced authority on the subject in the Act of Congress September 4th 1841. As he was on this matter and as it formed the most important part of his conduct in the Assembly besides as principles embodied in the clauses in question had been pretty fairly assailed the greater part of the explanation he was there that day to offer might be given at once. He for one would never support any Land Bill that did not give bona fide settlers a right upon conditions which should guard the privileges for such settlers of selection at minimum prices. Mr. Robertson's clauses proposed to give the bonâ fide settlers a right of selection and purchase without auction or competition of some 160 acres more or less on condition of residence thereon by the purchaser or his assigns for five years and cultivation within that term of twenty-five per cent. of the total acreage. The purchaser was to pay twenty-five per cent. on making the selection and the residue in five years. Now the introduction of these clauses he was sorry to say had been bitterly opposed by the Ministry and neglected by the Assembly. The Auction system pure and simple was alone what the Government and the House would hear of. The Ministry and several gentlemen who supported them cried out with triumphant complacency that that was the system which obtained In America. Black and white noonday and midnight were not more widely different than the American and Australian auctions. But he Mr. Deniehy went further; there was as regarded the bona fide settler in America no auction at all. The immigrant could choose anywhere it lay unsold one hundred and sixty acres of land without competition of any kind upon the simple condition of settling there. The American land policy he contended lay at the root of the national prosperity of the United States. During the fifty-seven years it had obtained it had peopled the country by tens of thousands; it had created and added to the Federation sovereign state after sovereign state ; it had called into existence city after city in what had before been waste places of the forest. It had carried religion law letters industry and the human affections into the heart of the wilderness and it had borne Anglo-Saxon civilisation with freedom and plenty in its train from the shores of the Atlantic to the sea-board of the Pacific. It had brought about a new state of things in which the hand of the labourer could not hew out the line of railroad from one vast centre of population to another fast enough but locomotive steam excavators must needs be sent to scoop out the way. By this policy was not the Union if not the first power in the world yet ere long destined to be so? By this Iowa Minnesota Wisconsin Nebraska yesterday but barren names on the map of North America were at this hour thriving and rapidly increasing states of the magnificent Federation. But by a policy directly the reverse of this and brought about by the selfish the interested and the dishonest had New South Wales stopped short in her growth and though the mother colony of the group with a native population of her own been flung to the rear by the junior Australian states. By it had immigration been strangled her development totally arrested and after she had been plunged in debt for one-half of the few immigrants she had received her exchequer left empty. He Mr. Deniehy was uncompromisingly in favour of the reduction of pastoral lands to 5s. an acre. This was the cardinal point of his land creed. And though the returning officer had some half- hour before certified to his Mr. Deniehy's return to serve in the Legislature in the coming session as a member representing the fair county of Argyle yet if they thought him wrong here or believed his opinions vitiated his fitness to serve them he was that moment ready to retire and return into their hands the honour and the trust they had just invested him with. It was worse than useless it had been sure destruction to the country's progress this demand for 20s. an acre for what was frequently not worth twenty pence. It served the squatter's purpose for in point of fact it gave him a fee simple of the public lands at a trifling cost. Till somebody appeared who would give a pound an acre all round for the half million of acres superior and inferior as it was which some people occupied the said same people (they knew who he meant) might hold it till the day of judgment. [65] [66] [67]   To the squatter himself the bona fide squatter who was willing to become a colonist if he were allowed to do so it was unjust and in this way as a national policy ruinous.   Mr. Deniehy then proceeded to give his views on the electoral question which would be the battle-ground of next session declaring that population ought to be the basis of representation.   Having defended his motion for making the magistracy elective Mr. Deniehy concluded by remarking that it was no unfitting time on that occasion of his second return without opposition for their county to say to them with the sincerity that kindles itself in depths of gratitude that it had been the cherished hope of his boyhood and that hope was still bright and strong and warm within him that he would live to be of some service to this his dear native land. He had even had the hope - for images beautiful and benign as this ever haunt the path of boyhood - and he said it with all modesty and with the humility with which some experience of the average abilities of mankind had taught him to regard himself - that such talents as nature had endowed him with and sedulously cultivated might even do some honour to his beloved country. They the men of Argyle had favoured him comparatively a stranger to them with an opportunity of serving the country and of testing whether he possessed the abilities which would entitle him to record amongst those sons of the soil who whilst as every true man must do making a position for themselves had done services and evinced powers entitling their memories to honour amongst their fellow-men. For this he again thanked them from his heart; and what such humble intelligence as he possessed directed to the advancement and protection of their interests could do and whatever of energy of loyalty and courage was in him should be exerted in return. But it was a sense of duty alone and a conviction that his country required the services of every faithful son of hers which induced him to re-enter political life. He neither sought nor cared for place. He had long since made up his mind that every shilling he should ever own should be earned by himself and he was proud of that determination. He had a right to expect that he should one day be in the government of his country but that he confessed had for him nothing very alluring about it. He knew too well by how frail a tenure political power and political popularity were held to set store by that. It would go hard with him if their children yet did not regard with feelings very different to those with which a memorial of discredit is contemplated the fact that Argyle had once upon a time sent into Parliament as her member a young man who was the first native born Australian who had forged his way into the Legislature of the land on his own merits and without the aid of wealth family or influence. [68]  MR. DENIEHY amidst the most vociferous cheering rose and said :-   If anything could teach him how perfectly politic it was irrespective of considerations of honesty and truth for a man to walk in the straight path of duty it was the reception that assemblage of the citizens of Melbourne had honoured him with. In politics as in all other things honesty was the best policy and even an honest opponent men could afford to respect and admire though they were not likely to treat him to such an ovation as he Mr. Deniehy had just received. He wished to do a plain and practical thing that evening and having accepted their invitation to meet them carry out his intention of giving a brief account of how opinion and action on the Land question stood in New South Wales. He would assure them that there was a desire as ardent and as deep in that colony for the settlement of this problem as there was in Victoria. The struggle they were making the battle they were fighting was no mere contest for theories but a holy war to establish a final and equitable settlement of a question which once wisely disposed of would ensure the solution of all others. And if as he Mr. Deniehy believed the first great aim of statesmanship in a new country should be to people the soil - in a word to create a great community it was not saying too much to assert that an enlightened and progressive Land policy involved everything. [69]  Now he had heard and with deep pleasure of what had been said and done in Victoria on this great question and the opinions expressed at the interviews of the Land Convention with Mr. Plunkett were pleasant and heartening tidings to the land reformers of New South Wales. He had been but a fortnight in Melbourne but of one thing he was profoundly convinced - that here this essentially democratic question the battle for a Land Law which meant a battle for the existence of Australia as a great union of free and flourishing states would be fought and he Mr. Deniehy had faith enough in the right to believe it would be won. It was quite possible that here as in the sister colony the men who propounded a land policy similar to that of America were looked upon as visionaries as dangerous theorists with a strong spice in them of the Jacobin - men who were exasperated and perhaps very naturally so by the state of things - the bitter grinding competition and the absence of breathing room in the older countries; were mad upon the possession of freehold properties. [70] Perhaps authority and possession of the public estates which possession was in Australian political practice as in law - nine points - imagined that the diseased ideality of the masses pointed to cottagé ornées and model farms on savage plains fit only for sheep and cattle and the nomadic servants of the pastoralist. But by way of answer to this without going into the political economics of the matter he Mr. Deniehy had one important fact to communicate to them and it was one of the principal reasons why he had come there that night. It was that the adoption of the American Land System as far at all events as regarded the central point around which all its peculiarities revolved had been proclaimed by two Ministers of the Crown in New South Wales two Ministers for Lands and Works as being the only sound reliable and expedient national Land policy. The first Secretary for Lands and Works in Mr. Cowper's Government was his Mr. Deniehy's distinguished friend Mr. Terence Aubrey Murray Member for the Southern Boroughs. In this gentleman they had perhaps the only representative of the old territorial aristocracy who had come out from those with whom he had been connected by long years of sympathy and association to join the ranks of the Land reformers. Mr. Murray saw when Mr. S. A. Donaldson thought fit to assume the premiership under circumstances which he Mr. Deniehy and those who worked with him held to be of a most un constitutional character an attempt on the part of the Tory Squattocratic party to wrest the prize of responsible government for the purpose of perpetuating their own dominancy. That gentleman then became one of the most fearless active and determined leaders of the Opposition. In Mr. Murray they had one of the most highly cultured the purest the most eminent of men in character in social position and property in New South Wales and though. he Mr. Deniehy had had sufficient experience in his life to know that the possession of vast wealth was no guarantee on the part of the lucky possessor particularly on the Land question he thought Mr. Murray's great stake in the country might be fairly taken into account in considering the value of the part he had taken and the views he had enunciated on the matter for he Mr. Deniehy had repeatedly been told that nobody entertained selection notions but hare-brained Utopians Jacobins at torchlight meetings who not only knew nothing of the physical properties of the soil but who never would have life energy or industry enough to know what the possession of landed property was and who were certainly little disposed to recognise the sanctity of vested rights. Well what was Mr. Murray's action in the matter? Not only did he hold as the Land Convention of Victoria did that the Land question was the only problem of national polity worthy at this stage of national existence of occupying a statesman's chief attention - not only did he believe in free selection as they did but he went even further. The Minister for Lands and Works the highest type of an Australian gentleman whom even his worst enemies recognized as a standard authority in practical rural affairs went the length of moving in the House resolutions to the effect that if the Surveyor-General's Department (which by the way was one of the most exquisitely Machiavellian pieces of machinery for the complete strangling of colonial settlement which a Metternich in a moment of supreme inspiration might have conceived) could not or would not survey fast enough it should be competent for an individual to go in on the land on his own survey and take his chance afterwards if he had not acted honestly of having his lot reduced when the late and lengthy hour of the Government surveyor arrived. Fully and thoroughly in his views on free selection did Mr. Murray know and feel the common sense of the principle that every man in the choice of a piece of land whereon he intends to found a home is the best judge of his own requirements. He knew that Free Trade as applied to the settlement of a country was as true as to any other imaginable thing. Mr. Murray knew that a Government composed of all the sages the world ever saw and backed up by the scientific knowledge of all the surveyors living could not point out to a community of men the spots on the earth's surface that would individually suit them best. No ; Mr. Murray knew that the true politics of the Land question were the scattering of human souls men women and children and all the bounties the charities the graces of life over the land. [71] [72]  The Australian Governments hitherto had unfortunately dealt with this question not as a means towards an end not as the instrument by which a great nation was to spring into being on their shores but as the stock-in-trade of gigantic land jobbers and real property auctioneers who in the fervour for fancy prices had lost sight of their duty and their trust. A high minimum price and restrictions as to where a man should buy were no doubt capital things in a saleroom; but if they wanted to see how they operated in the creation of states let them look at New South Wales and learn. Ay to-morrow if that Colony with her almost boundless territories had a liberal Land Law she might with high hopes of winning run a race with proud Victoria all her golden treasures notwithstanding.   The other Minister of the Crown to whom he alluded was his Mr. Deniehy's dear and honoured friend Mr. John Robertson. In that gentleman who was at present Minister for Lands and Works not only did there meet all that was sound and sagacious in a politician and brave true and generous in a man but the topmost degree of rural experience - the experience of a tiller and a dweller on the soil - one in fact who had gone out with his flocks and herds when squatting for youth energy and small means was a living reality and not an outlet for the greedy monopoly of the grasping capitalist.   Mr. Robertson's ideas on the Land question were pretty well known to most of them. He it was who moved the insertion in the Cowper Land Bill providing for free selection with such guards and restrictions as would protect the provision from the land shark and wholly reserve its benefits for the bona fide selector. Besides a practical knowledge of the country and the people such as few could boast but the present Minister for twenty years a propagandist and confessor for freedom in the gloomy days when was rampant an oligarchy sprung from the darkness and degradation of the colony's penal origin - besides those things the hon. gentleman was an immense landed proprietor. [73] Was this then the sort of man likely to be ignorant enough or designing enough to introduce an insidious evil into the policy of the land where lay his all unless he were convinced there was both right and expediency in the principles which he fought for? If the great land- owners ever did and he Mr. Deniehy thought they seldom did look upon this question as a matter privately affecting themselves they knew that the settlement of the country must improve the value of their own possessions; and the huge all-devouring squatter had doubtless as much sagacity on this point as they had. But the interest and the point of view were different. The squatter was oftenest a mere bird of passage making use of land not his own but the public's on grossly unfair but gloriously profitable terms till he had served his turn and filled his money bags. The squatter had but a passing interest in the soil the people had their all; and whilst he Mr. Deniehy was on this subject he would most emphatically warn the people to accept not of the intervention of "Liberals" - the so-called "Liberals" - in legislating for the settlement of the land. Those "Liberals" were in his Mr. Deniehy's opinion the respectable mild soda water of Australian politics - neither wine nor spirit. As this was a problem involving colossal private interests and sending ramifications through varying sections of society they should have none but advanced men men who went the entire zoology of the thing the great principle of free selection. Let them remember in this matter above all others that those who were not with them were against them.   Now briefly as to the nature of the clauses introduced by Mr. Robertson and which he Mr. Deniehy had the honour and pleasure he never had greater in his life - of seconding. They would all recollect that the main feature in the Cowper Land Bill was the reduction of the general minimum price of £1 an acre or rather the reduction of the class of lands used for pastoral purposes to 5s. an acre. On the wisdom and soundness of this proceeding all right-minded and disinterested thinkers in New South Wales were agreed. The present as a general price was prohibitory and well did those who enjoyed the exclusive privilege know it; and besides whatever the land was worth to the people of the day it would in most cases fetch. Of old in New South Wales when the premier object was to settle the country land was given away ay and convict labour to boot with it. In Canada much the same thing was still done; and in America the figure was at most but a quarter of our upset price. He Mr. Denicehy did not say that the land should be given away; all that he asked for was the fixing of a fair price and the granting of facilities at and under which the people could obtain the land which suited them best. But he did say and fearlessly say that that Government knew nothing of its business who would not if there were no other inducements for attracting emigration to their shores give land away rather than be without population and leave the territory a vast sheep walk instead of a land of happy smiling homes strong honest men and fair and loving women. [74]  The chief features of Mr. Robertson's claims were deferred payments and permission to select wherever the applicant listed on condition of actual residence and the cultivation of a certain quantity of the land. The details of the clauses were mainly of a character to protect the settler from the claws of the land-jobber and the trickster who fatten upon ignorance and credulity. The debate on Mr. Robertson's amendments settled the question of the admission or non-admission of free selection principles in the Cowper Ministers' Bill. His Mr.Deniehy's hon. friends in the Government were not prepared for anything so revolutionary and in their minds intended to bring chaos back again. They seemed to coquette just a little-the least bit in the world-with squatting opposition for they must remember squatting opposition was singularly seductive and human nature - Ministerial human nature at all events - was not more shielded from temptation than others. Ministers refused to insert what would alone have made the Bill a reality and satisfied the country. Mr. Robertson thereupon moved the consideration of the Bill six months later. The squatting section who believe in the status quo principle of course joined the eleven good men and true. Ministers were driven to the country and the Assembly dissolved. He Mr. Deniehy besought them to think and believe that any Land Bill which did not make free selection its cardinal point its Alpha and Omega was only a sham and a cheat. What was the greatest squatting interest of the hour to which he Mr. Deniehy was no foe but simply one who would not let it monopolise all - what was it in itself but the grandest the most signal the most victorious proof of the soundness of the free selection principles as to the development of any interest connected with the opening up and making available distant lands ? What were the particular circumstances under which what was termed the land beyond the boundaries had been taken up ? How had the splendid energy of exploration thrown open for productive purposes the vast acreage of the country ? Simply by the practice of holding that the squatter was the best judge of where he should go by placing no impediment in his way but rather inviting him to go out find and occupy where he interfered with nobody. Had the men who pushed civilization on from line to line who dared with dauntless courage and adventurous energy the boomerang and the poisoned spear of unknown savages loss of life and the destruction of their property by barbarians - had they been kept idle and seen their money waste not only till it pleased the Surveyor-General of his public grace to mark them out stations but the good pleasure of the Executive to say where they should turn in search of fresh fields and pastures new - would river and plain after river and plain be as they were now fair and prosperous with flocks and herds ? And what but this applied to another form of dealing with the soil has sent life and industry religion and human love from New York to Nebraska. and Oregon and is carrying by its quick free genial operation the Great American races from the shores of the Atlantic to those of the Pacific ? [75]  Now he Mr. Deniehy had heard that it had been denied that there was any recognition of that kind of theory in American law. With all modesty and the most unfeigned respect for the opinions of those who denied the thing and unless some dementing spell was laid upon men who got into the chaotic hurly-burly of land politics he Mr. Deniehy had himself seen and quoted in the Parliament of New South Wales a statute in answer to a denial on the subject by the honourable member for West Camden Mr. James MacArthur. And he Mr. Deniehy had reprinted the clauses of that Statute in the Empire newspaper at the time the Land debate was occupying public attention. But granting even that free selection was not statute law in the Union it was practice and usage recognised by the Federation and therefore the common law of America. He Mr. Deniehy as a lawyer thought it mattered little as to consequences whether a thing remained cognisable at common law or was triable by statute. [76]  They the men of Victoria in their new thoroughly democratic country had a glorious task before them in this struggle. Every blow they struck here would be a blow struck for their brethren beyond the waters of the Murray; and he Mr. Deniehy had faith at all times in the Victoria people - a faith fresh kindled and ablaze since he had been amongst them seen them known them learned to respect and find in them so much of the young valiant independent blood of Europe - that they would manfully help and assist his own countrymen. In doing this they would not only benefit themselves but open homes for those in the Old World who are fainting by the way for want of air and breathing room. It was a grand thing for them all a thing worth living for to have a hand at once in the building up of a nation and the redemption of the sorrowing and the unfortunate from that pain which comes of seeing want in the eyes that are dearest in all the world and which make earth heaven. This was their work. He Mr. Deniehy knew that they would do it and do it nobly and in a moral sense as well as a material "make the howling wilderness to blossom like the rose."   2. In your capacity as a judge you have had frequent opportunity of acquiring a knowledge of the slate of the magistracy in the colony? Yes; I have had considerable opportunity.  3. And what is your opinion of the body generally? There are some very good useful and competent magistrates; but I think there are some who do not merit that character.  4. Have you been of opinion for some time that it is desirable as a body that the magistracy should be reformed? I think there is much need of revision and reformation. I think the mode of appointment is not satisfactory. I believe the mode of appointment of magistrates is embarrassing to the Government and unsatisfactory for the purpose of a judicious selection. It is moreover an increasing embarrassment because under the present state of our Government - the Ministers having the power and right of appointment it is with great difficulty they can refuse an application enforced by the recommendation of their political supporters. I say this of course with indifference as to whether one party or not is in power. I think it is difficult for any party in power to refuse applications that may be thus pressed upon them.  5. Do you think the slate of the magistracy about ten or twenty years ago was better? I think it was much better . . . I believe from what I can recollect that the appointments were considered more satisfactory and inspired more confidence although no doubt from the vast power the magistrates had formerly there were many things to disapprove of. I think greater care and attention was paid to the appointments and they inspired more confidence in the community.  6. Do you think - suppose we take the days of Sir Richard Bourke - that the magistracy was in a more satisfactory state? I think it was; and also in Sir George Gipps' time. General Darling and Sir R. Bourke had opportunities of making very good selections from the many experienced military officers who were scattered in detachments over the colony. These advantages subsequent Governors did not possess. I think Responsible Government has increased the difficulty of the Government in appointing men eligible for the office solely on account of their fitness for the office.  7. Do you think the magistracy declined in character during the administration of Sir Charles FitzRoy? I do.  8. From your observation of the working of the magistracy do you think there has been any improvement since Responsible Government was introduced? I cannot say there has. A great number of the adherents and friends of those who have been or are in power have been placed in the Commission (of the Peace: that is appointed as magistrates). The Committee must bear in mind that in general estimation to be in the Commission of the Peace is considered a decisive test of belonging to the rank of a gentleman. .  9. Have you had an opportunity of observing at all what effect some of these appointments have had on the great mass of the population in the country districts? Great distrust in the Benches on which such magistrates appear; the consequence is that parties endeavour to settle their disputed matters as best they can amongst themselves without appealing to the proper tribunal.  10. The confidence in minor courts is thus destroyed? Yes; and I have heard such expressions used as "I would go anywhere rather than before such or such a Bench of Magistrates". [100]  51. With regard to the apparent want of confidence felt by the people generally in the decisions of the Benches of Magistrates in the interior do you think the appointment of Police Magistrates has remedied the evil or restored the confidence of the people? I think the Police Magistrates are very useful and indispensable in some places. They generally inspire confidence and are mostly well-selected.  52. Should you not think the position of a Police Magistrate considering his appointment and his not having local influences or connexions - should you not think in general that Police Magistrates would occupy a position that would render them of necessity more generally impartial than unpaid magistrates? Yes. I am of that opinion.  53. In that case you would consider that it would effect the objects of the committee of rendering the appointment of Police Magistrates as general as circumstances would permit ? I think so.  54. You think it would have a good effect? I think so. They are always on the spot and acting as far as my observation of them has gone from a sense of duty. They are paid for their labour which stimulates them to perform their duty at all times and seasons. One is always sure of a Police Magistrate in the interior but the other magistrates who are obliged to attend to their local business are not so constrained to attend to their magisterial duties. Besides they have their pastoral or agricultural interests to attend to. I think the Police Magistrates are a very useful body of men and have been always found to be so.  55. Would you not say from the circumstance of their position that their legal knowledge would be superior to unpaid magistrates? Yes their study and business naturally make them so. It is their duty to be more acquainted with the law than unpaid magistrates.  56. Do you think it desirable to substitute unpaid magistrates by paid magistrates? Certainly not. I should always like a gentleman to have the weight influence and position his rank and the respect of his neighbours inspire.  LAND LAW REFORM  TO THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH WALES  "This is not the cause of faction or of party or of any individual; it is the common interest of every man in the country."  THE LAND LEAGUE OF NEW SOUTH WALES in now putting forward their manifesto think it right to preface the exposition of their views with the remark that while themselves holding pretty strong convictions regarding the main principles of any measure of Land Reform which they would call sound or satisfactory they consider that at this Stage of the movement it is neither necessary nor desirable they should go much into detail. It is expected that ere long branches of the League will be established all over the country. From these 'bodies delegates will be invited to meet the Central Society in Sydney for the discussion and final adjustment of details and it would be inconsistent with that prospect if the League were to do more at present than to give such a general indication of their views as may at once furnish a common basis of union and action among the friends of the cause throughout the country.  In dealing with a question of this nature it is clearly of the utmost importance that the ranks of the Liberals should be united in one firm and unfaltering phalanx. The supporters of the system which the League wishes to alter are combined to a man in upholding it and nothing but the most cordial union among the people and the people's friends can be expected to make the desired impression upon the colossal grievance the gigantic evil which the League wishes to remove. [100] United in a just and good cause and relying on the zealous use of constitutional means the people may now effect any reform they please; but be their cause ever so good or their course in pursuing it ever so constitutional dissension among themselves is sure to end in defeat. To divide the people to divide and conquer is one of the enemy's grand devices and it therefore behoves the friends of reform to be on their guard against this stratagem.  From various causes which will be more fully pointed out in the sequel the Crown lands of this colony have hitherto been practically placed as far beyond the reach of the great body of the people as if those lands had had no existence at all. By the lavish alienation of immense tracts to persons whose only merit in many cases was that directly or indirectly they possessed a certain degree of influence with the Government of the day a large extent of the richest and most accessible lands of the colony has been permanently placed out of the people's reach and the greater part of the remainder having been effectually locked up under squatting leases the whole colony in as far as the people's of it is concerned may with scarcely a figure of speech be described as a mere myth a mere will-o'-the-wisp which attracts only to delude and disappoint. Like the mirage of the desert the land as beheld afar off does indeed excite both hope and desire; but like that torment of the weary traveller it too often also  "Fades away untouched untasted.  For the sake of the most primitive the most wasteful and the most imperfect of all modes of occupying a country which professes to be civilised the progress of agriculture has been systematically repressed the extension of settlement has been ruinously retarded and the grand purposes of colonisation have been practically ignored.  Of this long course of mismanagement the baneful and bitter fruits are but too patent to the public eye to require any comment or illustration at the hands of the League but in confirmation of the position which they have taken up they will add a word or two.  Through the great difficulties which the present law has placed in his way the intending cultivator of the soil has found it next to impossible to acquire a piece of land of his own. The people have thus been prevented from dispersing themselves in such numbers as they otherwise would have done over our rural districts and in consequence Sydney and the other chief seats of our population have become unnaturally overcrowded. Through the keenness of competition arising out of such a state of things land in and around our cities and towns has been run up to almost fabulous prices. The ingenious mechanic the stalwart yeoman and the industrious labourer - those classes of society which form the bulk and basis the bone and sinew of every Anglo-Saxon nation - have been foiled in every fair effort to find a home of their own and in despair have at last in too many instances been obliged to submit to the remorseless exactions of that class of men whose special and peculiar business it is to reap where they have not sown to gather where they have not strawed and to grind the faces of the poor. [101]  In our rural districts again although in them there may be less of human misery and destitution staring one in the face than is to be witnessed in our cities there is such an aspect of dreary desolation presented to the eye that the traveller can hardly fail to be painfully impressed with a sense of the fact that in the interior of Australia the arts of civilisation have made but very little progress. The conviction is reluctantly forced home upon him that there is "something rotten in the state of Denmark" something radically wrong and that a great change is certainly wanted. Flocks and herds there are indeed to be seen here and there but in miserable disproportion to the enormous extent of the public domain which is held by their owners and held too at a rent or assessment to the Crown of the most trifling amount. Traces of agriculture there are indeed to be seen here and there but in patches so few and far between that the great bulk of the people are still everywhere fed with imported breadstuffs. And yet monstrous and marvellous as it may appear if the bona fide cultivator attempts to get a piece of land of his own to produce his own loaf he is at once met with difficulties which are all but insuperable. The survey system with its endless circumlocutions and indefinite delays and the auction system with its cruel competitions and vexatious uncertainties very often prove far more than a match for the stoutest and most hopeful heart; and the chances are that the immigrant is finally compelled either to abandon the field altogether or to take a piece of ground on a clearing lease where he spends his energies in improving the property of perhaps the very man who has blasted his hopes of attaining a freehold of his own and has virtually reduced him to the condition of a serf.  It is a principle which is deeply incorporated with the whole constitution of our nature and one upon whose due development almost all human improvement depends that man is a social creature and that the first thing to be done in raising him in the scale of being whether in a physical or a moral in a social or a religious point of view is to place him in communities and surround him with all the benign and elevating influences which naturally spring out of settled society. To the realising of these things the present land system opposes an almost insurmountable barrier; and therefore the League in proposing to break it down think they have a right to reckon upon the countenance of every well-wisher of his country. [102]  To conclude the League would in a very few words direct attention to the fact that while they wish as their primary object to stimulate and facilitate the agricultural settlement of the country they do not as they conceive by their proposals do anything to obstruct the full and legitimate development of its pastoral capabilities. On the contrary they have the strongest conviction - a conviction which is amply justified by the whole history of colonisation - that under the operation of their principles a powerful impulse would be given to the increase not merely of our agricultural but also of our pastoral produce. They emphatically disclaim all participation in the feeling of indiscriminating hostility by which some unthinking men are animated towards the squatters and still more distinctly disavow the motive which has been so industriously imputed to the League of desiring the immediate and entire annihilation of the pastoral interests of the country. It is against the system not against the men that the League are combined; and being satisfied that the very highest and the very best interests of society conspire in demanding a radical change in the law they entertain sanguine hopes of success in the work they have now on hand.  The present system must and ought to give way for a better; and it is a fact as remarkable as it is instructive that while reason and justice seem to teach the same lesson and point to the same fate Nature herself seems to have decreed its ultimate extinction inasmuch as it is found that lands which have been depastured by sheep for a long succession of years undergo such a process of deterioration as to become in a great measure unfit for the purposes of the Australian sheep farmer and we accordingly sec that in the settled districts of the colony where the country has been longest occupied the value of pastoral land as such has materially declined. Without any extravagance of language therefore the present squatting system may be said to devastate a country in a manner somewhat similar to that marking the advance of an invading army - consuming in the first instance its natural riches then impairing for a time its reproductive powers and leaving nothing but sterility and desolation behind it. In point of fact the only legacy left by the pastoral occupant to the district on which he has gathered his riches is in most cases but a crop of thistles and burrs and the dilapidated remnants of a few miserable huts.  Men of Australia and especially you who in your children's welfare have a deep and durable interest in the progress of Australia remember that - "Now's the day and now's the hour" for achieving a victory which will secure to yourselves and for your posterity the blessings of plenty and peace of social happiness and national prosperity. [103]  "Wherefore be strong and of good courage that it may be well with you and that ye may prolong your days in the good land which ye shall possess. For surely the land whereon your fret have trodden shall be your inheritance and your children's for ever."  JOHN BLACK PRESIDENT OF THE LEAGUE.  C. G. REID HONORARY SECRETARY.  I would have begun to address you ladies and gentlemen with a great and holy thought of Elizabeth Barrett Browning's which embodies that illustrious lady's ideas of Woman's duty as a member of the Commonwealth - had not a remarkable passage from the Book of Books occurred to my mind. I may without irreverence or pedantry read you the passage which is so full of wholesome truth and rich poetry. It is taken from the Book of Proverbs and reads thus:  Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.  Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come.  She openeth her mouth with wisdom and in her tongue is the law of kindness.  She looketh well to the ways of her household; and eateth not the bread of idleness.  Her children rise up and call her blessed; her husband also and he praiseth her.  Now we have here from the mouth of ineffable wisdom itself the characteristic traits of the greatly good woman. We have immaculate purity; exquisite sensibility; indefatigable industry; and strength of mind and purpose. In proportion as a woman - no matter to what sphere of duty called - possesses these qualities - in proportion as they give shape and colour to her mortal nature - so is she good; great; pre-eminent; heroic! (Applause.) Fling upon her all fame and glory - hail her genius her devotedness her enthusiasm - bow before her surpassing beauty and exquisite grace - worship her queenly presence and her lightning wit; still if she lack the four normal attributes referred to she is no heroine as I understand the term. (Applause.( She is of the earth earthy. She is an ephemeral divinity! [320]  - the gilding will soon fade and the glory depart! But if on the other hand she be possessed of these four cardinal virtues then indeed shall the words of the wise man be verified - "Her children shall rise up and call her blessed."  I have made these preliminary remarks because I intend presently to meet an objection and attack a prejudice. There never was a great social or civil reform that did not create opposition and excite enmity. This is a consequence and consequently a natural result of our poor weak fallible nature. Honest efforts at great civil and social reforms then causing commotion as they do; arousing enemies and enmities; exciting jealousies; alarming weak heads and craven hearts; - are sure to be misrepresented - they are overlaid with falsehoods and calumnies so that it takes time and requires patience courage and a good conscience to effect a happy result.  During the last thirty or forty years a movement has been made to remove certain social disabilities of Woman - to elevate her position in the commonwealth - to enfranchise her with certain moral privileges - and to enlarge the sphere of her activity and usefulness. The effort was an honest and an honourable one. Discussion ensued and the best of the argument lay on the side of the weaker sex while all or most of the wit and humour was with the stronger. A joke may contain a reason although the chances are sadly against any such gold veining the quartz. But it is no joke to scout and flout fair straightforward logical reason out of the field by jokes - some of them pointed - others very blunt; some possessing attic salt - others very unsavoury - some very piquant and peppery - others very flat and flippant.  One of the greatest literary caricaturists of the age has made the question of "Woman's Rights" as ridiculous as a vivid fancy and a fine eye for contrasts could make it. He has created the absurd and improbable character of Mrs Jellyby. [...]  Now this description is all very funny and may have been provoked by certain eccentricities of certain ladies who felt themselves "called to perform missions"; - but that this sketch should be flung in the face of every earnest woman who makes an effort to elevate the condition of her sex is as absurd as it is unjust. [321] These Mrs Jellabys are not the women who will do anything greatly good. They want one or more of the prime conditions laid down at the very outset of my remarks. They forget their domestic obligations - they forget their most obvious responsibilities - they do not possess that particular sort of industry which alone is recommended by the "wise man". In the Female Heroism which I commend and on which I propose to talk with you for a half-hour tonight you will find none of their extravagance. You will find no moral or domestic duty neglected - no personal responsibility laid aside. You will see that women can go earnestly and directly to a good work with the same bravery and loyalty as men. You will find nothing absurd nothing unfeminine nothing unbecoming the co-operation of every true Christian patriot in that species of "Woman's Rights" which I am here this evening to advocate.  But inasmuch as I have given you Mr Charles Dickens's idea of "Woman's Mission" in the ridiculous character of Mrs Jellyby perhaps you will permit me to quote a few lines from the pen of a dear friend a noble example and shining light to her sex. Let us see bow a woman's idea of "Woman's Rights" compares with Mrs Jellyby's practice. The passage runs thus:  The Rights of Women! what are they? The right to labour and to pray!  The right to succour in distress -   The right when others curse to bless!   The right to smooth the brow of pain   To lift the fallen up again!  The right to suffer and forgive!  The right to teach men how to live!  (Loud and long contained applause.)  O my friends these are woman's true rights! These are the glorious duties which it is our high mission to perform! These are the heroic achievements that the true women of the Nineteenth Century are expected to accomplish! These are the labours which have written the name of Miss Dix on a million hearts - these are the deeds which have encircled with a halo of imperishable glory the honoured names of hundreds of English heroines. (Sensation.)  Before proceeding further with my discourse it may not be impertinent to the general question at issue to answer a personal charge that may be made. The general reasoning that I shall adduce would indeed be a sufficient answer to the particular charge but I will take the objection up for a moment in a more direct manner. Why am I doing so unusual a thing for a lady - why am I attempting to lecture tonight? To this I have two answers to make: First as the Editor of a public journal I am in the habit of addressing myself to the general public. [322] There is no conclusive reason why if I can amuse or instruct the public in that capacity I may not in this. (Cries of hear! hear!) I have another answer. I am here - although perhaps some will be ungenerous enough to doubt the assertion - I am here really and positively this night to do good! (Applause.) How that good may be accomplished I shall presently attempt to explain. There never was an age in the worlds history in which woman did not by her life and actions demonstrate that divine gifts had been bestowed upon her the queen as well as upon man the lord of creation. From Judith to Joan of Arc - from Joan of Arc to Elizabeth of England - from Elizabeth of England to Maria Therese - from Maria Therese to our own sovereign lady Queen Victoria - fame and glory or rather the glories of bright fame - like a radiant atmosphere surround and encircle them. They each have niches in the temple - a halo round their heads - places in the annals of human greatness - and they are memorable examples for all time to come. (Sensation.) And if woman has adorned the crown and the diadem - if she has stood in regal pomp at the head of mighty nations - if her virtues have added grace and dignity to the sceptre - if her beauty has dazzled amid the glittering pageantry of court and state so also has her presence like the sun-rays that burst from the Eastern hills shed bounteous blessings in every scene of life. Go to yonder humble cottage-home. See the poor young wife - she whose whole wealth is the wealth of a pure conscience and a loving heart! See how her gentle assiduities console and comfort her husband who has just returned home after a day's struggle with the great selfish world. See how her home smiles with beauty - how flowers just bursting into blossom carefully tended and nurtured by her hand add fragrance and loveliness to all - till even Poverty himself ever intruding where he is not wanted slinks away and hides his diminished head. (Laughter and applause)  But it is not to eulogise the achievements or dwell on the renown of my sex that I address you. I prefer rather to call your attention to the fact and if possible make you converts to my opinion - that there is a finer more vigorous more healthy development in woman's efforts to accomplish the great and good - that is the heroic - in this Nineteenth Century than has hitherto manifested itself. I will not read you biographies of illustrious heroines; but I will in the course of my remarks adduce shining instances of their high ambition and good work done as illustrations of the justness of the position I take.  But before I proceed I wish to call your attention to one important point. It is the imperative duty of society to find immediately additional means of honest and respectable employment for females! Old Europe full of inhabitants and full of prejudices must sooner or later suffer great disasters unless the means of earning a virtuous livelihood is found for every adult female. And Australia the fairest child of an august parent must share in the disasters as well as the blessings of the fatherland. [323] The sneers and jokes about women in the senate - women in the army - women at the bar in gown and wig - are mere subterfuges - a mean shrinking of the knotty question at issue. We do not look for nor desire employment in the army the navy the bar - and why? Because as Dr Wharton of America would say because we are WOMEN! He writes:  Physiology points us to the grand fact of sex. It tells us what that means. It tells us that Woman is human but not Man. She is Woman! The vine and oak both spring from a common source the earth. They both grow and flourish and decay. They have elements and laws in common. But they have elements and laws not common those namely which constitute one a vine and the other an oak which makes one tall and strong the wrestler with the storm which makes the other dependent graceful and ornamental. Both were planted for ends by the Creator; and to compare the ultimate utility of those ends or to murmur because they are not the same is to shame the thoughts of Deity and denounce him as an imperfect being.  The sex of woman has entailed upon her a weaker constitution generally. Her muscular system is of slighter texture. She is liable to injurious fatigue from violent exertion. Exercise cannot bring her up to the physical level of man and while it thus fails it renders her less feminine. The women of Sparta were the least attractive of those of Greece; and the youths who contemplated matrimony turned from the gaunt Amazons to the romantic and fascinating maidens of Athens. Yet in contending for the participation of women in all the political privileges of men you would metamorphose our fair Athenians into ungainly Lacedemonians; for privileges are never unaccompanied with duties with laborious conditions preliminary to their enjoyment. In effect you would establish a more barbarous rack than that of Procrustes for women would be its tortured victims.  Now these remarks have not been contravened by any true heroic woman of the age. They are true to nature and therefore just. But is this any answer to the general charge that women are not experiencing the blessings of advancing civilisation in proportion as men are? How many situations in life are open to industrious young Women? Are they employed in printing houses in jewellers' shops in studios chemists' establishments and other light occupations? No! They are only dressmakers or school mistresses or drapers' assistants and no more! They are driven in hundreds - yea thousands and thousands - through the force of circumstances often through actual want and the inhuman thoughtlessness of men to live for ever in the violation of God's holy law! The days of gloomy superstition are past and gone. The dull dark cloud like a heavy nightmare no longer rests on the enlightened soul. The forest is no longer full of fears - the old hail no more the home of terrors - the earth and air are no longer contaminated by the presence of the unhappy dead. [324] "We no longer believe in ghosts" cries out Hans Christian Anderson 'and no longer believe that the dead in their white garments appear to be living at the hour of midnight. Ah! we see them yet in the great cities. By moonlight when the cold north wind passes over the snow and we wrap ourselves closer in our cloaks we see white-garmented females in light summer dresses beckoning float past us. The poisonous atmosphere of the grave breathes from their figures - trust not the roses on their cheeks for the death's bead is painted there' Their smiles are the smiles of intoxication or of despair! They are dead - more horribly dead than our deceased ones. The soul is interred - the bodies wander like evil spirits hither and thither! They are horrible unhappy ghosts which do not sink into the graves by the morning twilight! No for then they are followed home by the dreams of despair which sit like nightmares on their breasts and tell them of the scorn of men of a better life - of a terrible terrible hereafter! 'Save me! save me!' is oftentimes the cry of such unhappy being. But everyone flies away horrified who hears the voice out of the grave till she has no longer strength to throw from her the coffin lid of her circumstances and the heavy earth of sin!"  O my good friends is not this terribly truthful and truthfully terrible? Think of these midnight ghosts of the Nineteenth Century - think of these creatures with the tainted atmosphere of death surrounding and around them. Think of all this and then ask your conscience each one of you. "Have I done ought to bury these unholy ghosts that not only haunt us by night but flout the heavenly sun by day!" (Sensation.)  In proportion as civilisation advances the temptation to live on the bread of sin and death seems to be brought nearer day by day to thousands of our sex. But as in the first French Revolution we find the most heroic virtue as well as the most atrocious profligacy - the loftiest patrotism as well as the most wretched treachery - the sincerest piety as well as the most shameless neglect of God and all holy things; so in this corruption of the age in this wide dishonour to our common humanity - side by side with the evil a great and glorious good has arisen. Women - brave noble energetic women have gone forth clothed in purity brighter than raiment made from the sunbeams - crowned with Charity a more radiant diadem than the stars of God - walking strongly in Faith with the simple majesty of Eve in Eden before the fall - inwardly illumined with Hope a light from the luminous centre above; they have gone forth I say with the invincible and impregnable armour of a pure intent to do battle with the dragon - to wage war against the hydra-headed monster that destroys and desolates so many homes. They have spoken in their prayerful powerful might and the demon Intemperance has spread his dark wings and soared away; they have stooped to lift from the dust of death their sin-stained sisters and God has blessed them in their good work - they have founded "Female Hospitals". "Magdalen Retreats" and "Houses of the Good Shepherd". [325] And the women who engaged in the good cause - who sacrificed many of the most obvious joys of life for the sake of humanity - were of the high and noble of the earth. Their example is indeed bright and memorable. Their heroic deeds are worthy of man's reverence and man's love! (Deep sensation.)  Thus it is ladies and gentlemen that we find woman's beneficent influence permeating and pervading like an atmosphere of light and fragrance all climes all countries and all nations. The proud and mighty bow to her - the lowly pay her homage. She was honoured above all - she was the mother of that great Architect who has designed for fallen man a path - more beautiful than Jacob's ladder of old which reaches from earth to heaven! She was the follower of that great Teacher who went about doing good! She lingered at the foot of the cross when its heavenly Victim suffered - she mourned at the door of the sepulchre till the grave gave up its dead and Immortality appeared robed in glory to display its mighty triumph over death! (Sensation)  But perhaps you will tell me that while all these remarks are just and eminently true they are not pertinent to the question at issue.  You will tell me that woman is and will ever be respected in her own proper sphere. You will tell me that woman is born to be the light and the blessing of home - that whenever she steps aside from the duties of domestic life to face the world in public capacities she becomes in some sense a gladiator. That the Editor's chair and the lecturer's desk are not within her proper sphere. Well my friends I have but one answer to make to these objections. The surest standard by which to judge of man's fitness for his profession is just this - his success. And should not the same rule apply to my own sex? Can I not point you to a hundred shining instances wherein women have succeeded as public teachers? Who today stands at the head of the literary press of America? A WOMAN - Mrs Stephens. (Applause) Who has for many years maintained an honourable position in the literary press of England? A WOMAN - Eliza Cook. (Loud applause.)  Who has even penetrated to the country of the Celestials and taken her place at the head of the literary press to teach the Chinese barbarians respectable English? A WOMAN - Mrs Beecher. And may not I less gifted and more humble than these whom I have named strive to emulate their good works in this fifth division of the globe? I challenge my opponents to give one good and substantial reason why I should be denied this privilege.  But I must hasten to give you one or two illustrations of Female Heroism in the Nineteenth Century. I might dwell on the deeds of Grace Darling and others; but I am rather anxious to point you to deeds of moral not of physical greatness. [326] And perhaps in this connection it may not be out of place for me to relate to you an anecdote - an incident in the life of my good friend and sister Miss Dix of America. You have all doubtless heard of this lady. She was born in the city of Boston United States. She was the child of opulent parents and during her early years she was surrounded with all the refinements and luxuries of a patrician home. But she had a heart which could feel for the woes of her fellow creatures. She knew that God had given her talent strength of mind warm sympathies. She asked herself - "Shall I waste my years in indolent pleasure at home while lacerated hearts and desolate hearths are all around me? No! I will go out into the world and faithfully perform the duty which God has given me to do.'  She turned her attention to prisons and prison discipline. She visited every jail and penitentiary in the United States. She entered the convict's cell and carried light and blessings with her. The condemned in his dungeon all chained as he was fell on his knees and kissed the hem of her garment when she told him of that mercy which is vouchsafed to the contrite in heart. Thus year after year did that heroic woman travel up and down the land introducing reforms in prison management till at this hour through her instrumentality the prisons of the United States are changed from their former horrible and disgusting condition to be the most perfectly managed establishments of the kind in the known world. (Cries of hear hear!)  On one occasion Miss Dix was the only passenger in the mail through a wild and unsettled country. She noticed that the guard had provided himself with a huge pair of pistols and that his conduct was somewhat singular and constrained. She asked him why he carried those weapons? Because madam" he replied 'this is a very dangerous road. The mail has been robbed more than once in this forest and it is well to be armed." "Give me the pistols!" she exclaimed "I will protect the mail? He did so very reluctantly. Soon after a powerful man sprang from the bush seized the horses presented a revolver and demanded the money and valuables of the party. She looked out from the window and said to the highwayman. "Sir would you be so unmanly as to rob a woman? I am the only passenger in the coach. I have but little money and what I have I intend to give for the benefit of the prisoners confined in jail at the next town. Still if you are suffering I will give you half!"  He listened to her words relinquished his hold of the horses and approached the carriage window. "That voice" he exclaimed "1 think I know that voice. Are you not Miss Dix? Before she could reply he had caught a glimpse of her face. He threw his revolver from him and fell on his knees. 'God forever guard and bless you Miss Dix" he cried as great tears streamed down his swarthy face. [327] "I was a prisoner in the Philadelphia jail condemned to death. You visited me - you wept with me - you prayed for me. I escaped from prison and I am now a fugitive obliged to hide in this forest and to get bread by robbery. But never so help me God would I wrong the woman whose lips have breathed a prayer for me!" (The sensation and applause was here so long continued as to occasion a considerable pause in the discourse.) Saying this he plunged into the depths of the forest and disappeared.  Now my friends will you tell me that woman has no right to step aside from the duties of domestic life? Will you tell me that her place and her only place is at home a puppet in the chimney-corner or a drudge in the kitchen? Will you tell me that she ought not to have a soul above puddings and pastry? - that she is only competent to darn stockings and sew on buttons on the one hand or to gossip or gad on the other? Heaven forbid that we should be deficient in the culinary department; and I sincerely advise the gentlemen never to take a wife till she has served at least a short apprenticeship to pies and puddings. (Loud laughter and cheers.) But if she can not only make a tart well but accomplish the higher and more important duties of life well there is no earthly reason why she should not be allowed to do so. (Hear hear.)  But it is not only in high moral warfare that the women of our age have won imperishable renown. In a more appalling field of heroic enterprise they have brought away honours far beyond trophies and laurel crowns. When the flame of red war fanned by the black wing of the eagle of the North lit all the heaven east and west - when men rushed madly to the strife and the conflict rage in their hearts and blanching words on their lips - when the cannon awakened the and the trumpet sounded its shrill notes of danger - there was a soft presence in the midst of the -fierce warriors - there was a heavenly light streaming along and if I may be allowed the expression silver-lining the lurid clouds! Woman - mild beneficent devoted and heroic woman - was there; - yes was there to avert as far as might be the horrors of the strife - to attend the sick and wounded - to comfort the bereaved - to counsel the weak - to do in her own gentle but energetic way the great work of God. O my hearers you know as I know and you value as I value those pale-faced Sisters of Charity who during the horrors of that memorable Crimean winter flitted from camp to camp blessings on their lips charity in their hearts loving kindness and human kindness vibrating through every chord and fibre of their natures. And you remember as I remember and you reverence as I reverence the radiant moon that rose up among those virgin stars. Nobler than all in goodly presence - higher than all in queenly grace - equally single-minded enthusiastic and devoted - she illuminated that dark epoch of history and banished half its night away. [328] Yes you remember as I remember and you reverence as I reverence that name first and highest among holy names in the Nineteenth Century - that heroine so far above all heroes - that mortal so far above mortality - that name which you cannot utter without heaving hearts and swimming eyes - that name written in immortal characters among God's high and noble ones - the name of Florence Nightingale! (Immense applause.)  Here I might well pause. My sex is vindicated. I need speak no more and still this audience would retire more than satisfied. They have listened to my illustrations of the greatness the heroism of my sex. O my sisters be proud! Bow not your heads - falter not your hearts. Remember the watchword before you. See how history is bright with our names. Read of Sarah the wife of Abraham's old age - of Ruth the gentle and loving - of MARY the follower of Jesus - then come down through the night of ages and on to that long line of English heroines who have given the British nation its strength and virtue. I tell you my sisters we may hold high our heads with a lofty and a holy pride when we think of these. When I think of them I am constrained to bend the knee in thankfulness to God that I am a woman. (Applause.)  On the achievements of woman in art and letters in our day I fear time will not allow me to dwell. The traces of her progress in these departments however are so remarkable that no one will deny she has in some of their highest walks excelled her male rivals. Who will deny that Elizabeth Barrett Browning is a great poet; that she is imaginative reflective bold real and impassioned. Tell me the poem of Tennyson's you can compare with her "Aurora Leigh"; or the piece of Longfellow's you will put alongside her sublimely shadowed "Exile". Tell me the prose writer in fiction you will compare with that wonderful Charlotte Bronte - the "she Carlyle" to use the somewhat too vigorous language of a literary friend of mine. For downright steady practical common sense put into bold thorough English - the fine old English our ancestors spoke three hundred years ago - who can excel the earnest heroic Harriet Martineau? And then there is in France that wonderful Madam Dudevant and there has been in Germany the thoughtful de Stael and there is in the cold North Frederica Bremer and there has been in Ireland Maria Edgeworth and in every European country within the last fifty years there have been great hardworking virtuous heroic Women.  And now a few words in conclusion. What is the moral of all I have said? What will be the result of this great heroic demonstration on the part of woman? What is to become of the thousands and millions of our sex who less gifted than these are obliged to tax their physical rather than their intellectual qualities? My observations have tended to this point - a point to the realisation of which I fearlessly tell you I have as far as in me lies devoted my humble life - namely to give equal facilities to women as are possessed by men towards earning as honest livelihood. [329] O if men are men if made of sterner stuff than women; if the great Creator in his ineffable wisdom bath given them larger bone and stronger muscle - if they have higher wisdom and superior inventive faculties - surely they can leave a larger field of productive labour open to the weaker feebler less gifted sex; and betake themselves to rougher labour and severer toil. We must have more means opened up to us of living honestly. The necessities of the world cry out for it. The destinies of society demand it. Therefore I ask you gentlemen to weigh this moral problem well - to tax your conscience on the duty you have to perform. And to you ladies I address myself. Many of you have already practised yourselves in the art of binding up wounds - of cooling the aching head - of strengthening the feeble heart - of illumining the darkened soul. O do not forget the exigencies of the times - the terrible condition of thousands of your sisters. Many of you are only walking in the first soft downy path of life. To you the world is young and bright and fresh and fragrant and musical. Nature smiles upon you with smiles of intense enchantment. The beauty of earth and the glory of heaven hold your souls in a divine enthralment. I say to you as you value the blessing of a long life without a stain - as you value the treasure of a happy memory - as you thank God that he gave you soft hearts and kindly nature - I ask you to cooperate in every movement for the elevation of your sex. The new year is at hand. God grant that through your instrumentality it may be a happy new year to many of the tempted and erring of your sisters. (Applause.) But not alone on myself nor on yourselves do I rely for the accomplishment of the great moral work - not alone in the human will and human arm do I confide - but on the might and power that never falters - on the love that never fails - on the goodness that is infinite - on God the Father of us all!  Mr. JENKINS assured the House that though he was aware that he was looked upon as a squatter yet that he had now no personal interest in squatting affairs; and that he only took an interest in them from believing that the squatters contributed more than any other class to the welfare of the colony. The chief objection he had to the bill was against the clause providing for free selection. Against this the gravest objections were to be urged. It had been stated that the squatters were hostile to the spread of agriculture but on the contrary the squatters would be only too glad to see agricultural settlements formed throughout the length and breadth of the land if they were confined to proper areas; since from these settlements they would be able to procure a supply of labour and would be saved the expense of carrying flour from the coast into the interior. From the long experience he had gained as a bona fide squatter his opinion upon these matters was entitled to some weight and he declared that he regarded free selection as a most unnecessary interference with the interest of the pastoral occupants the more particularly as the same object could be obtained by bringing some of the extensive surveys that had already been made into operation. It might not be known to hon. members that there were now two and a half millions of acres of land surveyed in the pastoral districts in large reserved blocks of from five to ten miles square. These had been originally selected and reserved on account of their capabilities and from their being adapted for the settlement of agricultural village communities and if properly subdivided and offered for sale would prove in his opinion necessary for every purpose that could be required. Unlimited free selection would he believed aim a fatal blow to the pastoral interest unnecessarily injuring a class that had given to the colony its largest exports. It had been said that the produce of the pastoral districts did not stand so high on the list of exports as those of the gold districts. [111] Now he did not with to depreciate that interest for he earnestly hoped to see it go on increasing; but he could show by statistics that a great mistake had been made when it was said that the produce of the gold-fields was superior to that of the pastoral districts. The hon. member then referred to statistics to show that while the export of gold dust from this colony amounted to between one and two millions sterling annually; the amount of exported pastoral products was between two and three millions. (Mr. GARRETT: Which employs the most labour?) It would be a very serious thing for the colony at large if there was any unnecessary interference with the pastoral interest. Hon. members might not be aware that at the present time the produce of grain in this colony was fast overtaking the demand. (Oh oh.) Recently issued statistics showed it to be the case that while up to last year the quantity of land put in crop was fast increasing the annual importations of grain since 1855 were gradually ally diminishing in proportion and the time was evidently near at hand when the colony would not require to import a single grain of wheat. He was very glad to find that such was the case - that without unduly fostering the agricultural interest we should be able to grow all that was required for our own consumption. If this were the case was there not danger of overproduction? (Laughter.) The hon. Premier might laugh but if a large number of persons went upon the Crown lands deluded and snared into doing so by the provisions of this bill should it unfortunately become law and taking up a position as debtor of the Crown upon agricultural lands there was the greatest danger of over-production as had been the case before and within the recollection of the hon. member himself. Then again there were to be expected occasional bad seasons which might greatly interfere to prevent the settler from meeting his engagements with the Crown the consequences of which if the cases were numerous would be much to be feared as instead of the Government being able to obtain its claims or the fulfilment of the engagements the settlers were under the settlers might demand the sympathy of the Government especially as it was through the Legislature they were brought into that position.   In speaking of free selection he (Mr. Jenkins) had stated that the squatters as a body did not object to afford proper facilities for the settlement of the country. The squatters in the district which he represented at all events were not hostile to the settlement of the land by an agricultural population and their views in this respect could not be considered otherwise than liberal. In the districts of the Gwydir Liverpool Plains and New England there were extensive reserves of land and he should have no objection to see some of these reserves properly surveyed and subdivided into farms which should be offered for sale at the same time on the same day in order to prevent a scramble for the best allotments. [112] Supposing fifteen to twenty allotments were sold the remainder should be left open to free selection at the upset price. The residue after this should be left as pasture for the benefit of the agricultural settlers so that they might have room for running their stock. These opinions had met the views of his constituents who considered that by these means all proper facilities would be given for the settlement of the land. With regard to deferred payments he had no objection to them provided the settlers were not thereby put into relationship with the Government as debtor and creditor- - a relationship he considered most dangerous. He proposed that they should enter upon the land as leaseholders for ten years to pay 2s. per acre annually and at the end of the ten years all payments to cease and the title to the land to be given to the settler. This was a species of deferred payment but instead of the relationship with the Crown being that of debtor and creditor it was that of tenant and landlord. He believed that one of the great evils likely to result from the passing of such a measure as this would be the consequent dispersion of the population. Crime was here unfortunately but too prevalent as compared with England; and especially drunkenness. This deplorable state of things the operation of this bill if it became law would greatly tend to aggravate. He held that the inevitable result of this measure would be to superinduce such a dispersion of the population as would very materially augment the evils referred to by removing the people from the ordinary ministrations of religion and by cutting them off from the benefit of schools of art and educational institutions generally. Other inconveniences would from time to time be experienced; the difficulty of having the work of blacksmiths and other handicrafts done when required would also be sensibly felt. In a moral social and material point of view he thought the House would do well not to aid in the dispersion of the population. He would be very glad to see the bill carried if he could think that it would be the means of attracting a large amount of immigration to these shores. This however he did not think would be the case. An analogy had been sought to be drawn between this country and America on this important question. No such analogy could in fact exist. Here we had no export market which they had in the United States. All that the community of this colony could do to attract an influx of immigration was to encourage the gold diggings and other industrial pursuits and so indirectly to afford proper assistance to agriculture. He considered that this was a most unnecessary piece of legislation - one which would materially interfere with the due development of the pastoral interest. As a practical squatter he could not forbear also to state that he firmly believed that one of the results of this bill would be that it would promote cattle stealing and be in many other ways a heavy discouragement to the pastoral interest. He regretted he was opposed to so many principles of the bill. [113]   He objected to the classification deferred payments and free selection. He believed the powers placed in the Executive by the classification clauses were most dangerous and he considered they should do all they could to limit instead of increasing powers possessed by the Government. Being opposed to so many principles of the bill he could not make up his mind to vote for the second reading of this bill although he was as desirous as any hon. member of seeing a land bill passed in order to stop this clamour which acted as a lever to raise so many men in power. He was in hopes when all these great questions were settled that they would turn their attention to other social measures which would benefit the community. If the bill went into committee which he supposed it would he would in committee do all he possibly could to emasculate all the objectionable features in the bill both by voting against them and endeavouring to substitute other clauses which he believed would promote the prosperity of the country. He should not think it worth his while to call for a division because a division did not shew the true sentiments of hon. members but if any hon. member called for a division he would divide with him against the bill.  MR. DENIEHY having been called upon to respond to the toast of "The Patriots of Ireland" rose from his seat and advanced into the centre of the hall where his appearance was the signal for a burst of loud and prolonged applause. When the cheering had somewhat subsided Mr. Deniehy said - [77]  At that late hour of the evening he was he found to come forward and speak to a toast which must of necessity and peculiarly so in that assemblage call forth the deepest and holiest feelings of human emotion. He could have wished so sensible was he of the difficulty of doing justice to the task imposed upon him that it had fallen upon some one better qualified than himself to reply to the toast of "The Patriots of Ireland." It would require the sweet notes of Ireland's own mournful music with its mixture of darkness and sorrow and military pride to fitly sing their requiem to evoke strains which could adequately celebrate the renown of the patriots of Ireland.   Ireland had sent forth her gallant sons by thousands to fight upon the bloody fields of France and Spain of Belgium and Austria of North America and other quarters of the globe and their daring deeds had reflected undying glory upon the annals of their country's fame. In every field of literature the fairest chaplet had been won and worn by Irishmen who had distinguished themselves as scholars poets painters sculptors authors and as aspirants and victors in every honourable path in life ; but of all those of her many gifted children those whom Ireland loved best were neither her artists her painters her poets nor her sculptors but her own dear patriot sons who had struggled for her in her hour of need and now sleep in their unhonoured graves.   Perhaps she loved them the more because their efforts on her behalf had not been crowned with those splendid successes with which patriotism elsewhere has been so often blessed. The Englishman was proud of his Hampden and the other great names which adorn his history; the Frenchman glowed with pride at the remembrance of those who had achieved so much for the freedom and greatness of his nation ; but in other lands such as Italy Hungary and Ireland there was a deeper and tenderer feeling connected with the memory of patriots. In those countries their heroic labours had not hitherto been blessed with a due measure of success yet they were passionately loved and fondly remembered for had they not done their dear utmost? They had ever bravely and loyally done what they believed to be right what they were convinced was for their country's welfare. [78]  Mr. Deniehy having thus spoken of those of Ireland's patriots who might be regarded as the martyrs to ideas on political questions that were open to difference of opinion passed on to pay a splendid tribute to those who might be termed the Constitutional Patriots of Ireland to Curran Henry Grattan Chief justice Bushe and others of that gallant band who had fought shoulder to shoulder for Irish independence.   In conclusion he warmly urged upon those present the necessity of purity of action in working out the idea of responsible government in this country; recalling in glowing language the time when the Union was carried in the memorable year 1800 - carried by the suicidal vote of a base corrupt and venal parliament - carried in spite of the god-like efforts of Curran and the handful of brave spirits who had ranged themselves under his banner.   REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTER-COLONIAL CONFERENCE ASSEMBLED IN MELBOURNE IN THE MONTHS OF MARCH AND APRIL 1863.  The Suggestion that an Inter-Colonial Conference should be held at which delegates from the various colonies of New South Wales Victoria South Australia Western Australia Tasmania and Queensland should assemble in order to consider the possibility of adopting a uniform tariff was made by His Excellency Sir Dominick Daly Governor of South Australia. Circumstances interfered to prevent the Conference from assembling until the present year when representatives duly appointed by their respective Governments attended on behalf of all these colonies with the exception of Western Australia and Queensland.  The reasons urged by those colonies for not sending delegates are stated in the letters from the Colonial Secretary of Western Australia and the Principal Under-Secretary Queensland.  The delegates so appointed and who appeared on behalf of their respective Governments were - [...] [280]   The Executive Council Chamber Melbourne was appropriated by the Government of Victoria for the sittings of the Conference and a preliminary meeting at which all the delegates were present was held there on Thursday the 26th of March when it was determined that the election of a chairman was unnecessary; and that as one of the main objects of the Conference would be defeated by premature publicity the proceedings should not be open to the public but that the results only should be communicated. The first formal meeting took place on the following day and the sittings extended to the 13th April.  The subjects discussed were: - First. - The Tariff and subjects of a kindred character including drawbacks and ad valorem duties.  Secondly. - Inland Inter-colonial Customs Duties and their distribution.  Thirdly.--Transportation from the United Kingdom to the Australian possessions.  Fourthly. - A permanent Immigration Fund to be provided by Act by each colony upon an equitable basis.  Fifthly. - Improvements of Internal Rivers in Australia for purposes of navigation and irrigation.  Sixthly. - Coast Lighthouses and other maritime questions affecting the shipping interest.  Seventhly. - Fortnightly Ocean Postal Communication.  Eighthly. - Anglo-Australian and China Telegraphic.  Ninthly. - Legal questions: including the Law of Bankruptcy of Patents of Joint Stock Companies of Probates and Letters of Administration and a Court of Appeal for the Australian Colonies.  Tenthly. - A uniform system of Weights and Measures. [281]  Upon these subjects the following resolutions were passed viz.: - 1. - On the Tariff and kindred subjects - That this Conference deems it desirable to settle the basis of a uniform Tariff for the Australian colonies and also for Tasmania.  That the articles to be rendered subject to duties should now be discussed.  That this Conference is of opinion that the ad valorem mode of levying duties upon goods is open to so many objections that it ought not to be resorted to.  That the following Tariff be adopted by this Conference viz.: -   That the members of this Conference undertake to urge upon their respective Parliaments the adoption of such Tariff.  That in the opinion of this Conference the Tariff which has been agreed upon after the fullest deliberation ought not to be altered by any one colony nor until after proposed alterations shall have been considered in a future Conference.  That drawbacks be allowed on the following articles viz.: -  That the secretary prepare in quadruplicate a schedule containing the Tariff and the list of the articles on which drawbacks are to be allowed and that the treasurers present do affix their signatures to such schedules and each take one schedule to be kept in a sealed envelope until required for Parliamentary' discussion.  That Tuesday the 2nd June at half-past four o'clock be fixed as the day and hour for bringing forward the attended Tariff question in all the colonies.  2. - On Inter-colonial Customs Duties and their distribution - That in the opinion of this Conference Customs Duties ought to be paid to the revenues of those colonies by whose population the dutiable goods are consumed.  That this Conference is of opinion that the Colonies of New South Wales Victoria and South Australia ought to co-operate with each other to secure to each colony the revenue to which it is legally entitled either by the distribution of the Customs Revenues collected by all at stated periods rateably according to their population or by some other mode which may be considered equitable and practicable.  3. - On Transportation - That this Conference address Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen praying that Transportation may not be established or continued in any portion of Her Majesty's Australian Dependencies.  That a Committee consisting of Messrs. Cowper O'Shanassy Meredith and the Mover (Mr. Blyth) be appointed to prepare the address. [282]  That this Address be adopted viz.: - May it please Your Majesty  We Your Majesty's loyal and dutiful subjects the delegates appointed by the respective Governments of New South Wales Victoria South Australia and Tasmania to consider matters of common interest in conference assembled beg leave to approach Your Majesty with assurances of our attachment to Your Majesty's person and Government.  We humbly assure Your Majesty that the appointment of a Royal Commission to enquire into the subject of transportation from the United Kingdom has filled the inhabitants of the Australian Colonies with alarm under an apprehension that some portion of Your Majesty's Australian possessions may be selected as a site for a new penal settlement.  We desire to impress upon Your Majesty that transportation to any part of Australia whether settled or not would practically be transportation to those colonies now existing; would be regarded as a breach of faith more especially by the large numbers of Your Majesty's subjects who have settled in Australia since transportation was discontinued; would impede the current of free immigration seriously affect the moral welfare of the people and cause a large increase in the expenses of the several Governments.  We venture humbly to remind Your Majesty that we have already had experience of the injurious effects produced by transportation and that the result of that experience was communicated to Your Majesty in addresses and petitions from Your Majesty's loyal subjects in these colonies. That in compliance with thc prayer of those remonstrances Your Majesty was graciously pleased to cause the discontinuance of the system then in existence and the colonists were consequently led to believe that no proposal for its re-establishment would ever be entertained.  We desire humbly to inform Your Majesty that if the Report of the Royal Commission should recommend the revival of transportation to Australia and if that recommendation should unhappily be adopted the utmost dissatisfaction would be felt throughout the whole group of these colonies now flourishing and contented and the strong feeling of loyalty which now so universally prevails would be materially weakened.  We humbly implore Your Majesty to refuse Your Majesty's sanction to any proposal for reviving transportation to any part of Your Majesty's Australian possessions and we also entreat that Your Majesty will be pleased to direct that as early as possible the transportation of convicts from the United Kingdom to Western Australia should cease as daily experience proves that the existence of a penal settlement there inflicts much injury upon these colonies. [283]  We desire humbly to assure Your Majesty that in acceding to the prayer of the petitions which were formerly addressed to Your Majesty and in the establishment of that enlightened policy which has been of late years manifested toward these colonies Your Majesty has strengthened in a high degree those feelings of dutiful attachment which it is our anxious and earnest wish should be maintained; and in appealing on this important occasion to Your Majesty we humbly beseech Your Majesty to prevent the infliction of so deadly a blow to the welfare and happiness of these colonies and to their moral and social progress.  That four copies of the Address be engrossed for transmission to Her Majesty and that a copy be presented by the delegates of the several colonies to each Governor respectively requesting that he will be pleased to transmit it.  4. - On Immigration: - That in the opinion of this Conference it is of the highest importance to the prosperity and future greatness of Australia that a healthy flow of immigration should be encouraged and promoted from the United Kingdom chiefly; and as permanent legal appropriation for the accomplishment of this object has been made already by some of the local legislatures by devoting a fixed proportion of the revenues derivable from the alienation of the public lands it is but just in pursuance of a common interest that similar provision should be made on an equitable basis such as population and revenue by all the legislatures respectively.  That when such arrangements have been perfected the decision already come to by this Conference in relation to any alteration in the tariff should apply with equal force and justice to any proposed alteration affecting the legal provision for promoting immigration viz.: That an Inter-colonial Conference be called to consider the subject before any legislation is proposed by the respective governments.  5. - On improvements to the great rivers of the interior: - That in the opinion of this Conference the commerce population and wealth of Australia can be largely increased by rendering navigable and otherwise utilizing the great rivers of the interior such as the Murray Edward Murrumbidgee and Darling and that the obligation of carrying into effect the necessary works to accomplish these objects devolves primarily upon the respective governments having control over such rivers.  The defendant is one of two men who were engaged by Mr. Carter from the Immigration Depot Melbourne. The following is a copy of the agreement   Memorandum of Agreement made 7th. September 1863 between G. L. Carter of Fryerstown of the first part: and John Kerr free immigrant per ship -  of the second part. The conditions are that John Kerr engages to serve the said G. L. Carter as maker of women's boots and shoes by piecework (being a thoroughly competent and good workman) for the term of twelve months in consideration of which services the said G. L. Carter agrees to pay the said John Kerr wages at the rate of 100 per cent in advance upon English prices".  G. L. Carter stated: The defendant entered my service from the 7th. September to 2nd. October. He did not give me any notice of his leaving. The agreement was written at Fryerstown and finished by the Immigration Office Melbourne. ... The first week he earned 14 / -; the last three days he earned 16 / -. The defendant could have earned 35 / - to £2 per week. There are three kinds of work - order work shop work and manufacturers' work; mine is manufacturers' work: the lowest price of all is paid for the latter class. ... I have received some encouragement to proceed with this case. The Immigration Department sent me a reply to a letter on the subject. I have not got that letter. I commenced the proceedings voluntarily though I got some encouragement. I had an interview with Mr. Panton sub-treasurer of Castlemaine on the subject.  Edward Cleary stated in answer to Mr. Makinson - I came out to this colony with defendant. I was employed in Manchester doing work. I have done all kinds of manufacturing work. I was not engaged in manufacturing work for Mr. Carter. The articles put in the boots are superior to what I put in manufacture. [169] I told Mr. Carter he was not giving me 100 per cent on home prices. I got food from Mr. Carter. I could not go away. 2 / 6d. is the lowest price in Manchester; Carter gave us 3 / - first; he then advanced us 4d. I get 2 / 6d. in Manchester for the same work. Carter and myself have cancelled our agreement. Burnett (another employer) gave me 6 / - (per pair) in Fryerstown. Kerr could not make more than eight pairs per week. I swear that Carter has not given us 100 per cent advance on English prices.  Mr. Leech [for the complainant] - Mr. Carter has embarked in a new industry in this colony and it would be a serious thing were he to be placed in a position in which not only would his character be damaged but obstacles would be placed in the way of his developing the important industry in question. After some remarks on the character of Mr. Cleary's evidence and the amount of reliance to be placed on it the learned counsel proceeded to detail the kind of rebutting evidence which he would call. It was perfectly absurd to suppose that the prices stated by the witnesses for the defence were current in England: if so the sooner the better the immigration commissioners wrote to the working classes of England and informed them that they were receiving far higher prices than were obtainable in this colony.  A great deal of public money had been spent by the colony in bringing out workmen but if on their arrival they were to be encouraged in breaking their agreements and acting as Kerr and Cleary had done the sooner the importation of such men at the public expense was put a stop to the better.  The following witness among others was then called: - Matthew Peart a boot and shoe maker deposed - I have been eleven years in the trade. I came out as a Government immigrant and arrived in this colony on the 6th. of June last. I am now living at the Junction. I never knew much difference in prices in England. There are three classes of work here. The boots produced (made by Kerr) could not be called "order" work; they would be called "manufacturers' work". When I left England 1s. 9d. per pair was paid for this class of work. . . . This being the case for the prosecution.  Mr. Makinson [for the defence] proceeded to address the Bench. He criticised what he called the "gross vagueness" of the agreement. He could prove by numerous witnesses that the complainant had not paid an advance of 100 per cent on English prices. ... He concluded by characterising the conduct of the immigration agent and all those who had promoted the prosecution as cruel in the last degree. (He called a number of shoemakers who supported Cleary's account of the state of English wages and who spoke of unemployment in the trade there.)  His Worship remarked that a good deal of evidence had been imported into the case which did not properly belong to the specified charge. On the previous occasion (i.e. the first day of the hearing) it had been clearly proved that the defendant had absconded from his hired service and today it had been proved to his satisfaction that one complainant had kept his part of the contract. ... The defendant was not worthy of so-called "sympathy". He and his family had been brought out at the public expense and brought up from Melbourne to Fryerstown at the joint expense of the Government and Mr. Carter. His conduct was therefore inexcusable. He would inform the defendant that there was a Master and Servants Act in force in this colony; and in accordance with the provisions of that act he should sentence the defendant to one month's imprisonment in Castlemaine Gaol.  Defendant - May I make a few remarks? [170]  His Worship - Your solicitor will inform you that if you wish to appeal notice of appeal must be given.  Mr. Makinson - I beg to give notice of appeal.  DRAMATIS PERSONAE HUGO a Norman Baron and a Scholar.   ERIC a friend of Hugo's   THURSTON EUSTACE RALPH. Followers of Hugo.   HENRY a Page.   LUKE HUBERT. Monks living in a Norman Chapel.   BASIL Abbot of a Convent on the Rhine.   CYRIL a Monk of the same Convent.   OSRIC a Norwegian Adventurer and formerly a Corsair.   RUDOLPH an Outlawed Count and the Captain of a Band of Robbers.   DAGOBERT the Captain of some predatory Soldiers called "Free Lances."   HAROLD a Danish Knight.   ORION THORA AGATHA ELSPETH (Nurse of Thora's) URSULA (Abbess of the Convent on the Rhine) NUNS etc. Women.   Men-at-arms Soldiers and Robbers: Monks Friars and Churchmen: Spirits etc.      ASHTAROTH: A DRAMATIC LYRIC  [220] SCENE - A CASTLE IN NORMANDY A Study in a Tower; HUGO seated at a table covered with maps and charts of the heavens astronomical instruments books manuscripts &c. Enter HENRY a Page.   Hugo: Well boy what is it?  Henry: The feast is spread.  Hugo: Why tarry the guests for me?  Let Eric sit at the table's head;  Alone I desire to be. (Henry goes out.)  What share have I at their festive board?  Their mirth I can only mar;  To me no pleasure their cups afford  Their songs on my silence jar.  With an aching eye and a throbbing brain  And yet with a hopeful heart  I must toil and strain with the planets again  When the rays of the sun depart;  He who must needs with the topers tope  And the feasters feast in the hall  How can he hope with a matter to cope  That is immaterial? [221]   Orion: He who his appetite stints and curbs  Shut up in the northern wing  With his rye-bread flavoured with bitter herbs  And his draught from the tasteless spring  Good sooth he is but a sorry clown.  There are some good things upon earth -  Pleasure and power and fair renown  And wisdom of worldly worth!  There is wisdom in follies that charm the sense  In follies that light the eyes  But the folly to wisdom that makes pretence  Is alone by the fool termed wise.  Hugo: Thy speech Orion is somewhat rude;  Perchance having jeer'd and scoff'd  To thy fill thou wilt curb thy jeering mood;  I wot thou hast served me oft.  This plan of the skies seems fairly traced;  What errors canst thou detect?  Orion: Nay the constellations are misplaced  And the satellites incorrect;  Leave the plan to me; you have time to seek  An hour of needful rest  The night is young and the planets are weak;  See the sun still reddens the west.  Hugo: I fear I shall sleep too long. [222]   Orion: If you do  It matters not much; the sky  Is cloudy the stars will be faint and few;  Now list to my lullaby.  (Hugo reclines on a couch.) (Sings.)   Still the darkling skies are red  Though the day-god's course is run;  Heavenly night-lamps overhead  Flash and twinkle one by one.  Idle dreamer - earth-born elf!  Vainly grasping heavenly things  Wherefore weariest thou thyself  With thy vain imaginings?  From the tree of knowledge first  Since his parents pluck'd the fruit  Man with partial knowledge curs'd  Of the tree still seeks the root;  Musty volumes crowd thy shelf -  Which of these true knowledge brings?  Wherefore weariest thou thyself  With thy vain imaginings?  Will the stars from heaven descend?  Can the earth-worm soar and rise?  Can the mortal comprehend  Heaven's own hallow'd mysteries?  Greed and glory power and pelf -  These are won by clowns and kings;  Wherefore weariest thou thyself  With thy vain imaginings? [223]   Sow and reap and toil and spin;  Eat and drink and dream and die;  Man may strive yet never win  And I laugh the while and cry -  Idle dreamer earth-born elf!  Vainly grasping heavenly things  Wherefore weariest thou thyself  With thy vain imaginings?  He sleeps and his sleep appears serene  Whatever dreams it has brought him -  (Looks at the plans.)   If he knows what those hieroglyphics mean  He's wiser than one who taught him.  Why does he number the Pole-star thus?  Or the Pleiades why combine?  And what is he doing with Sirius  In the devil's name or in mine?  Man thinks discarding the beaten track  That the sins of his youth are slain  When he seeks fresh sins   but he soon comes back  To his old pet sins again.     SCENE - THE SAME HUGO waking ORION seated near him. Daybreak.   Hugo: Oh weary spirit! oh cloudy eyes!  Oh heavy and misty brain!  Yon riddle that lies 'twixt earth and skies  Ye seek to explore in vain!  [224] See the east is grey; put those scrolls away  And hide them far from my sight;  I will toil and study no more by day  I will watch no longer by night;  I have labour'd and long'd and now I seem  No nearer the mystic goal;  Orion I fain would devise some scheme  To quiet this restless soul;  To distant climes I would fain depart -  I would travel by sea or land.  Orion: Nay I warn'd you of this "Short life long art"  The proverb though stale will stand;  Full many a sage from youth to age  Has toil'd to obtain what you  Would master at once. In a pilgrimage  Forsooth there is nothing new;  Though virtue I ween in change of scene  And vigour in change of air  Will always be and has always been  And travel is a tonic rare.  Still the restless discontented mood  For the time alone is eased;  It will soon return with hunger renew'd  And appetite unappeased.  Nathless I could teach a shorter plan  To win that wisdom you crave  That lore that is seldom attain'd by man  From the cradle down to the grave.  Hugo: Such lore I had rather do without  It hath nothing mystic nor awful  [225] In my eye. Nay I despise and doubt  The arts that are term'd unlawful;  'Twixt science and magic the line lies plain  I shall never wittingly pass it;  There is now no compact between us twain.  Orion: But an understanding tacit.  You have prospered much since the day we met;  You were then a landless knight;  You now have honour and wealth and yet  I never can serve you right.  Hugo: Enough; we will start this very day  Thurston Eric and I  And the baffled visions will pass away  And the restless fires will die.  Orion: Till the fuel expires that feeds those fires  They smoulder and live unspent;  Give a mortal all that his heart desires  He is less than ever content.     SCENE - A CLIFF ON THE BRETON COAST OVERHANGING THE SEA HUGO.   Hugo: Down drops the red sun; through the gloaming  They burst - raging waves of the sea  Foaming out their own shame - ever foaming  Their leprosy up with fierce glee;  [226] Flung back from the stone snowy fountains  Of feathery flakes scarcely flag  Where shock after shock the green mountains  Explode on the iron-grey crag.  The salt spray with ceaseless commotion  Leaps round me. I sit on the verge  Of the cliff - 'twixt the earth and the ocean -  With feet overhanging the surge.  In thy grandeur oh sea! we acknowledge  In thy fairness oh earth! we confess  Hidden truths that are taught in no college  Hidden songs that no parchments express.  Were they wise in their own generations  Those sages and sagas of old?  They have pass'd; o'er their names and their nations  Time's billows have silently roll'd;  They have pass'd leaving little to their children  Save histories of a truth far from strict;  Or theories more vague and bewildering  Since three out of four contradict.  Lost labour! vain bookworms have sat in  The halls of dull pedants who teach  Strange tongues the dead lore of the Latin  The scroll that is god-like and Greek:  Have wasted life's springtide in learning  Things long ago learnt all in vain;  They are slow very slow in discerning  That book lore and wisdom are twain.  Pale shades of a creed that was mythic  By time or by truth overcome  [227] Your Delphian temples and Pythic  Are ruins deserted and dumb;  Your Muses are hush'd and your Graces  Are bruised and defaced; and your gods  Enshrin'd and enthron'd in high places  No longer are powerless as clods;  By forest and streamlet where glisten'd  Fair feet of the Naiads that skimm'd  The shallows; where the Oreads listen'd  Rose-lipp'd amber-hair'd marble-limb'd  No lithe forms disport in the river  No sweet faces peer through the boughs  Elms and beeches wave silent for ever  Ever silent the bright water flows.  (Were they duller or wiser than we are  Those heathens of old? Who shall say?  Worse or better? Thy wisdom O "Thea  Glaucopis" was wise in thy day;  And the false gods alluring to evil  That sway'd reckless votaries then  Were slain to no purpose; they revel  Re-crowned in the hearts of us men.)  Dead priests of Osiris and Isis  And Apis! that mystical lore  Like a nightmare conceived in a crisis  Of fever is studied no more;  Dead Magian! yon star-troop that spangles  The arch of yon firmament vast  Looks calm like a host of white angels  On dry dust of votaries past. [228]   On seas unexplored can the ship shun  Sunk rocks? Can man fathom life's links  Past or future unsolved by Egyptian  Or Theban unspoken by Sphinx?  The riddle remains still unravell'd  By students consuming night oil.  Oh earth! we have toil'd we have travail'd  How long shall we travail and toil?  How long? The short life that fools reckon  So sweet by how much is it higher  Than brute life? - the false gods still beckon  And man through the dust and the mire  Toils onward as toils the dull bullock  Unreasoning brutish and blind  With Ashtaroth Mammon and Moloch  In front and Alecto behind.  The wise one of earth the Chaldean  Serves folly in wisdom's disguise;  And the sensual Epicurean  Though grosser is hardly less wise;  'Twixt the former half pedant half pagan  And the latter half sow and half sloth  We halt choose Astarte or Dagon  Or sacrifice freely to both.  With our reason that seeks to disparage  Brute instinct it fails to subdue;  With our false illegitimate courage  Our sophistry vain and untrue;  Our hopes that ascend so and fall so  Our passions fierce hates and hot loves  We are wise (aye the snake is wise also) -  Wise as serpents not harmless as doves. [229]   Some flashes like faint sparks from heaven  Come rarely with rushing of wings;  We are conscious at times we have striven  Though seldom to grasp better things;  These pass leaving hearts that have falter'd  Good angels with faces estranged  And the skin of the Ethiop unalter'd  And the spots of the leopard unchanged.  Oh earth! pleasant earth! have we hanker'd  To gather thy flowers and thy fruits?  The roses are wither'd and canker'd  The lilies and barren the roots  Of the fig-tree the vine the wild olive  Sharp thorns and sad thistles that yield  Fierce harvest - so we live and so live  The perishing beasts of the field.  And withal we are conscious of evil  And good - of the spirit and the clod  Of the power in our hearts of a devil  Of the power in our souls of a God  Whose commandments are graven in no cypher  But clear as His sun - from our youth  One at least we have cherished - "An eye for  An eye and a tooth for a tooth."  Oh man! of thy Maker the image;  To passion to pride or to wealth  Sworn bondsman from dull youth to dim age  Thy portion the fire or the filth  Dross seeking dead pleasure's death rattle  Thy memories' happiest song  [230] And thy highest hope - scarce a drawn battle  With dark desperation. How long?  *  *  * * *  Roar louder! leap higher! ye surf-beds  And sprinkle your foam on the furze;  Bring the dreams that brought sleep to our turf-beds  To camps of our long ago years  With the flashing and sparkling of broadswords  With the tossing of banners and spears  With the trampling of hard hoofs on hard swards  With the mingling of trumpets and cheers.  *  *  * * *  The gale has gone down; yet outlasting  The gale raging waves of the sea  Casting up their own foam ever casting  Their leprosy up with wild glee  Still storm; so in rashness and rudeness  Man storms through the days of his grace;  Yet man cannot fathom God's goodness  Exceeding God's infinite space.  And coldly and calmly and purely  Grey rock and green hillock lie white  In star-shine dream-laden - so surely  Night cometh - so cometh the night  When we too at peace with our neighbour  May sleep where God's hillocks are piled  Thanking HIM for a rest from day's labour  And a sleep like the sleep of a child!     [231] SCENE - THE CASTLE IN NORMANDY THORA working at embroidery ELSPETH spinning.   Thora:(sings) We severed in autumn early  Ere the earth was torn by the plough;  The wheat and the oats and the barley  Are ripe for the harvest now.  We sunder'd one misty morning  Ere the hills were dimm'd by the rain  Through the flowers those hills adorning -  Thou comest not back again.  My heart is heavy and weary  With the weight of a weary soul;  The mid-day glare grows dreary  And dreary the midnight scroll.  The corn-stalks sigh for the sickle  'Neath the load of the golden grain;  I sigh for a mate more fickle -  Thou comest not back again.  The warm sun riseth and setteth  The night bringeth moistening dew  But the soul that longeth forgetteth  The warmth and the moisture too;  In the hot sun rising and setting  There is naught save feverish pain;  There are tears in the night-dews wetting -  Thou comest not back again. [232]   Thy voice in mine ear still mingles  With the voices of whisp'ring trees;  Thy kiss on my cheek still tingles  At each kiss of the summer breeze;  While dreams of the past are thronging  For substance of shades in vain  I am waiting watching and longing -  Thou comest not back again.  Waiting and watching ever  Longing and lingering yet  Leaves rustle and corn-stalks quiver  Winds murmur and waters fret;  No answer they bring no greeting  No speech save that sad refrain  Nor voice save an echo repeating -  He cometh not back again.  Elspeth: Thine eldest sister is wedded to Max;  With Biorn Hilda hath cast her lot.  If the husbands vanish'd and left no tracks  Would the wives have cause for sorrow I wot?  Thora: How well I remember that dreary ride;  How I sigh'd for the lands of ice and snow  In the trackless wastes of the desert wide  With the sun o'erhead and the sand below;  'Neath the scanty shades of the feathery palms  How I sigh'd for the forest of sheltering firs  Whose shadows environ'd the Danish farms  Where I sang and sported in childish years.  [233] On the fourteenth day of our pilgrimage  We stayed at the foot of a sandhill high;  Our fever'd thirst we could scarce assuage  At the brackish well that was nearly dry  And the hot sun rose and the hot sun set  And we rode all the day through a desert land  And we camp'd where the lake and the river met  On sedge and shingle and shining sand:  Enfolded in Hugo's cloak I slept  Or watch'd the stars while I lay awake;  And close to our feet the staghound crept  And the horses were grazing beside the lake;  Now we own castles and serving men  Lands and revenues. What of that?  Hugo the Norman was kinder then  And happier was Thora of Armorat.  Elspeth: Nay I warn'd thee with Norman sails unfurl'd  Above our heads when we wished thee joy  That men are the same all over the world  They will worship only the newest toy;  Yet Hugo is kind and constant too  Though somewhat given to studies of late;  Biorn is sottish and Max untrue  And worse than thine is thy sisters' fate.  But a shadow darkens the chamber door.  Enter THURSTON.   Thurston: 'Tis I Lady Thora; our lord is near.  My horse being fresher I rode before;  Both he and Eric will soon be here. [234]   Thora: Good Thurston give me your hand. You are  Most welcome. What has delayed you thus?  Thurston: Both by sea and land we have travell'd far  Yet little of note has happened to us -  We were wreck'd on the shores of Brittany  Near the coast of Morbihan iron-bound;  The rocks were steep and the surf ran high  Thy kinsman Eric was well-nigh drown'd.  By a swarm of knaves we were next beset  Who took us for corsairs; then released  By a Breton count whose name I forget.  Now I go by your leave to tend my beast.  (He goes out.)   Elspeth: That man is rude and froward of speech:  My ears are good though my sight grows dim.  Thora: Thurston is faithful. Thou canst not teach  Courtly nor servile manners to him.     SCENE - THE CASTLE WALL. THURSTON RALPH EUSTACE and other followers of HUGO seated at a long table. HAROLD seated apart.   Thurston: Who is that stranger dark and tall  On the wooden settle next to the wall -  Mountebank pilgrim or wandering bard? [235]   Eustace: To define his calling is somewhat hard;  Lady Thora has taken him by the hand  Because he has come from the Holy Land.  Pilgrims and palmers are all the rage  With her since she shared in that pilgrimage  With Hugo. The stranger came yesterday  And would have gone on but she bade him stay.  Besides he sings in the Danish tongue  The songs she has heard in her childhood sung.  That's all I know of him good or bad;  In my own opinion he's somewhat mad.  You must raise your voice if you speak with him  And he answers as though his senses were dim.  Thurston:(To Harold) Good-morrow sir stranger.  Harold: Good-morrow friend.  Thurston: Where do you come from? and whither wend?  Harold: I have travelled of late with the setting sun  At my back; and as soon as my task is done  I purpose to turn my face to the north -  Yet we know not what a day may bring forth.  Thurston: Indeed we don't.  (To Eustace aside) Nay I know him now  By that ugly scar that crosses his brow;  [236] And the less we say to him the better.  Your judgment is right to the very letter -  The man is mad.  Eustace: But harmless I think;  He eats but little eschews strong drink  And only speaks when spoken to first.  Thurston: Harmless or not he was once the worst  And bitterest foe Lord Hugo had;  And yet his story is somewhat sad.  Eustace: May I hear it?  Thurston: Nay I never reveal  What concerns me not. Our lord may conceal  Or divulge at pleasure his own affairs -  Not even his comrade Eric shares  His secrets; though Eric thinks him wise  Which is more than I do for I despise  That foolish science he learnt in Rome.  He dreams and mopes when he sits at home  And now he's not much better abroad;  'Tis hard to follow so tame a lord.  'Twixt us two he won't be worth a rush  If he will persist in his studies --  Eustace: Hush!  Ralph has persuaded our guest to sing.  Thurston: I have known the day when his voice would ring  Till the rafters echoed. [237]   Eustace: 'Tis pleasant still  Though far too feeble this hall to fill.  Harold :(sings) On the current where the wide  Windings of the river  Eddy to the North Sea tide  Shall I in my shallop glide  As I have done at her side?  Never! never! never!  In the forest where the firs  Pines and larches quiver  To the northern breeze that stirs  Shall my lips be press'd to hers  As they were in by-gone years?  Never! never! never!  In the battle on the plain  Where the lance-shafts shiver  And the sword-strokes fall like rain  Shall I bear her scarf again  As I have done - not in vain?  Never! never! never!  In a fairer brighter land  Where the saints rest ever  Shall I once more see her stand  White amidst a white-robed band  Harp and palm-branch in her hand?  Never! never! never!     SCENE - THE SAME. EUSTACE THURSTON and followers of HUGO. HAROLD. Enter by the hall door HUGO ERIC and THORA.   Eustace (and others standing up): Welcome Lord Hugo!  Hugo: Welcome or not  Thanks for your greeting all.  Ha Eustace! what complaints hast thou got?  What grievances to recall?  Eustace: Count William came with a numerous band  Ere the snows began to fall  And slew a buck on your lordship's land  Within a league of the wall.  Hugo: Count William has done to us no more  Than we to him. In his vineyard  Last summer or later maybe a boar  Was slaughter'd by Thurston's whinyard.  Thurston: Aye Hugo! But William kept the buck  I will wager marks a score  Though the tale is new to me; and worse luck  You made me give back the boar.  Harold: (advancing) Lord Hugo! [239]   Hugo: What! Art thou living yet?  I scarcely knew thee Sir Dane!  And 'tis not so very long since we met.  Harold: 'Twill be long ere we meet again. (gives a letter)  This letter was traced by one now dead  In the Holy Land; and I  Must wait till his dying request is read  And in his name ask the reply.  Thora:(aside) Who is that stranger Hugo?  Hugo: By birth  He is a countryman of thine  Thora. What writing is this on earth?  I can scarce decipher a line.  Harold: The pen in the clutch of death works ill.  Hugo: Nay I read now; the letters run  More clearly.  Harold: Wilt grant the request?  Hugo: I will.  Harold: Enough! Then my task is done. (He holds out his hand.)  Hugo I go to a far-off land  Wilt thou say "God speed thee!" now?  Hugo: Sir Harold I cannot take thy hand  Because of my ancient vow. [240]   Harold: Farewell then.  Thora: Friend till the morning wait.  On so wild a night as this  Thou shalt not go from my husband's gate;  The path thou wilt surely miss.  Harold: I go. Kind lady some future day  Thy care will requited be.  Thora: Speak Hugo speak.  Hugo: He may go or stay  It matters little to me.  (Harold goes out.)   Thora: Husband that man is ill and weak;  On foot he goes and alone  Through a barren moor in a night-storm bleak.  Eric: Now I wonder where he has gone!  Hugo: Indeed I have not the least idea;  The man is certainly mad.  He wedded my sister Dorothea  And used her cruelly bad.  He was once my firmest and surest friend  And once my deadliest foe;  But hate and friendship both find their end -  Now I heed not where he may go.     [241] SCENE - A CHAMBER IN THE CASTLE HUGO THORA and ERIC.   Hugo: That letter that came from Palestine  By the hands of yon wandering Dane  Will cost me a pilgrimage to the Rhine.  Thora: Wilt thou travel so soon again?  Hugo: I can scarce refuse the dying request  Of my comrade Baldwin now;  His bones are dust. May his soul find rest  He once made a foolish vow  That at Englemehr 'neath the watchful care  Of the Abbess his child should stay  For a season at least. To escort her there  I must start at the break of day.  Thora: Is it Agatha that goes or Clare?  Hugo: Nay Clare is dwelling in Spain  With her spouse.  Thora: 'Tis Agatha. She is fair  I am told; but giddy and vain.  Eric: Some musty tales on my memory grow  Concerning Count Baldwin's vow;  Thou knew'st his daughter? [242]   Hugo: Aye years ago.  I should scarcely know her now.  It seems when her father's vow was made  She was taken sorely ill;  Then he travell'd and on his return was stay'd;  He could never his oath fulfil.  Eric: If rightly I've heard 'twas Agatha  That fled with some Danish knight -  I forget the name.  Hugo: Nay she fled not far;  She returned again that night.  Thora: For a nun I fear she is too self-willed.  Hugo: That is no affair of mine.  My task is over my word fulfilled  Should I bring her safe to the Rhine.  Come Thora sing.  Thora: Nay I cannot sing  Nor would I now if I could.  Sing thou.  Hugo: I will though my voice should bring  No sound save a discord rude.  (Sings.)   Where the storm in its wrath hath lighted  The pine lies low in the dust;  And the corn is withered and blighted  Where the fields are red with the rust;  [234] Falls the black frost nipping and killing  Where its petals the violet rears  And the wind though tempered is chilling  To the lamb despoiled by the shears.  The strong in their strength are shaken  The wise in their wisdom fall;  And the bloom of beauty is taken -  Strength wisdom beauty and all  They vanish their lot fulfilling  Their doom approaches and nears  But the wind though tempered is chilling  To the lamb despoiled by the shears.  'Tis the will of a Great Creator  He is wise His will must be done  And it cometh sooner or later;  And one shall be taken and one  Shall be left here toiling and tilling  In this vale of sorrows and tears  Where the wind though tempered is chilling  To the lamb despoiled by the shears.  Tell me mine own one tell me  The shadows of life and the fears  Shall neither daunt me nor quell me  While I can avert thy tears:  Dost thou shrink as I shrink unwilling  To realise lonely years?  Since the wind though tempered is chilling  To the lamb despoiled by the shears.  Enter HENRY.   Henry: My lord Father Luke craves audience straight  He has come on foot from the chapel;  Some stranger perished beside his gate  When the dawn began to dapple.     [244] SCENE - A CHAPEL NOT VERY FAR FROM HUGO'S CASTLE HUGO ERIC and two Monks (LUKE and HUBERT). The dead body of HAROLD.   Luke: When the dawn was breaking  Came a faint sound waking  Hubert and myself; we hurried to the door  Found the stranger lying  At the threshold dying.  Somewhere have I seen a face like his before.  Hugo: Harold he is hight.  Only yester-night  From our gates he wander'd in the driving hail;  Well his face I know  Both as friend and foe;  Of my followers only Thurston knows his tale.  Luke: Few the words he said  Faint the signs he made  Twice or thrice he groaned; quoth Hubert "Thou hast sinn'd.  This is retribution  Seek for absolution;  Answer me - then cast thy sorrows to the wind.  Do their voices reach thee  Friends who failed to teach thee  In thine earlier days to sunder right from wrong?  [245] Charges 'gainst thee cited  Cares all unrequited  Counsels spurned and slighted - do they press and throng?"  But he shook his head.  "'Tis not so" he said;  "They will scarce reproach me who reproached of yore.  If their counsels good  Rashly I withstood;  Having suffered longer I have suffered more."  "Do their curses stun thee?  Foes who failed to shun thee  Stricken by rash vengeance in some wild career  As the barbed arrow  Cleaveth bone and marrow  From those chambers narrow - do they pierce thine ear?"  And he made reply  Laughing bitterly  "Did I fear them living - shall I fear them dead?  Blood that I have spilt  Leaveth little guilt;  On the hand it resteth scarcely on the head."  "Is there one whom thou  May'st have wronged ere now  Since remorse so sorely weigheth down thine heart?  By some saint in heaven  Sanctified and shriven  Would'st thou be forgiven ere thy soul depart?"  Not a word he said  But he bowed his head  [246] Till his temples rested on the chilly sods  And we heard him groan -  "Ah! mine own mine own!  If I had thy pardon I might ask for God's."  Hubert raised him slowly  Sunrise faint and holy  Lit the dead face placid as a child's might be.  May the troubled spirit  Through Christ's saving merit  Peace and rest inherit. Thus we sent for thee.  Hugo: God o'erruleth fate.  I had cause for hate;  In this very chapel years back proud and strong  Joined by priestly vows  He became the spouse  Of my youngest sister to her bitter wrong.  And he wrought her woe  Making me his foe;  Not alone unfaithful - brutal too was he.  She had scarce been dead  Three months ere he fled  With Count Baldwin's daughter then betrothed to me.  Fortune straight forsook him  Vengeance overtook him;  Heavy crimes will bring down heavy punishment.  All his strength was shatter'd  Even his wits were scatter'd  Half-deranged half-crippled wandering he went.  We are unforgiving  While our foes are living;  Yet his retribution weigh'd so heavily  [247] That I feel remorse  Gazing on his corpse  For my rudeness when he left our gates to die.  And his grave shall be  'Neath the chestnut tree  Where he met my sister many years ago;  Leave that tress of hair  On his bosom there -  Wrap the cerecloth round him! Eric let us go.     SCENE - A ROOM IN THE CASTLE. HUGO and ERIC. Early morning.   Hugo: The morn is fair the weary miles  Will shorten 'neath the summer's wiles;  Pomona in the orchard smiles  And in the meadow Flora!  And I have roused a chosen band  For escort through the troubled land;  And shaken Elspeth by the hand  And said farewell to Thora.  Comrade and kinsman - for thou art  Comrade and kin to me - we part  Ere nightfall if at once we start  We gain the dead Count's castle.  The roads are fair the days are fine  Ere long I hope to reach the Rhine.  Forsooth no friend to me or mine  Is that same Abbot Basil;  I thought he wronged us by his greed.  My father sign'd a foolish deed  [248] For lack of gold in time of need  And thus our lands went by us;  Yet wrong on our side may have been:  As far as my will goes I ween  'Tis past the grudge that lay between  Us twain. Men call him pious -  And I have prosper'd much since then  And gain'd for one lost acre ten;  And even the ancient house and glen  Rebought with purchase-money.  He too is wealthy; he has got  By churchly rights a fertile spot  A land of corn and wine I wot  A land of milk and honey.  Now Eric change thy plans and ride  With us; thou hast no ties no bride.  Eric: Nay ties I have and time and tide  Thou knowest wait for no man;  And I go north; God's blessing shuns  The dwellings of forgetful sons  That proverb he may read who runs  In Christian lore or Roman.  My good old mother she hath heard  For twelve long months from me no word;  At thought of her my heart is stirr'd  And even mine eyes grow moister.  Greet Ursula from me; her fame  Is known to all. A nobler dame  Since days of Clovis ne'er became  The inmate of a cloister.  Our paths diverge yet we may go  Together for a league or so;  [249] I too will join thy band below  When thou thy bugle windest.  (Eric goes out.)   Hugo: From weaknesses we stand afar  On us unpleasantly they jar;  And yet the stoutest-hearted are  The gentlest and the kindest.  My mother loved me tenderly;  Alas! her only son was I.  I shudder'd but my lids were dry  By death made orphan newly.  A braver man than me I swear  Who never comprehended fear  Scarce names his mother and the tear  Unbidden springs unruly.     SCENE - A ROAD ON THE NORMAN FRONTIERS HUGO AGATHA ORION THURSTON and armed attendants riding slowly.   Agatha: Sir Knight what makes you so grave and glum?  At times I fear you are deaf or dumb  Or both.  Hugo: And yet should I speak the truth  There is little in common 'twixt us forsooth;  You would think me duller and still more vain  If I uttered the thoughts that fill my brain;  Since the matters with which my mind is laden  Would scarcely serve to amuse a maiden. [250]   Agatha: I am so foolish and you are so wise  'Tis the meaning your words so ill disguise.  Alas! my prospects are sad enough:  I had rather listen to speeches rough  Than muse and meditate silently  On the coming loss of my liberty.  Sad hope to me can my future bring  Yet while I may I would prattle and sing  Though it only were to try and assuage  The dreariness of my pilgrimage.  Hugo: Prattle and sing to your heart's content  And none will offer impediment.  Agatha: (sings) We were playmates in childhood my sister and I  Whose playtime with childhood is done;  Through thickets where briar and bramble grew high  Barefooted I've oft seen her run.  I've known her when mists on the moorland hung white  Bareheaded past nightfall remain;  She has followed a landless and penniless knight  Through battles and sieges in Spain.  But I pulled the flower and shrank from the thorn  Sought the sunshine and fled from the mist;  My sister was born to face hardship with scorn -  I was born to be fondled and kiss'd. [251]   Hugo: (aside) She has a sweet voice.  Orion: And a sweet face too -  Be candid for once and give her her due.  Agatha: Your face grows longer and still more long  Sir Scholar! how did you like my song?  Hugo: I thought it rather a silly one.  Agatha: You are far from a pleasant companion.     SCENE - AN APARTMENT IN A WAYSIDE INN. HUGO and AGATHA. Evening.   Hugo: I will leave you now - we have talked enough  And for one so tenderly reared and nursed  This journey is wearisome perhaps and rough.  Agatha: Will you not finish your story first?  Hugo: I repent me that I began it now  'Tis a dismal tale for a maiden's ears;  Your cheek is pale already your brow  Is sad and your eyes are moist with tears. [252]   Agatha: It may be thus I am lightly vexed  But the tears will lightly come and go;  I can cry one moment and laugh the next  Yet I have seen terrors as well you know.  I remember that flight through moss and fern  The moonlit shadows the hoofs that rolled  In fierce pursuit and the ending stern  And the hawk that left his prey on the wold.  Hugo: I have sorrowed since that I left you there:  Your friends were close behind on the heath  Though not so close as I thought they were.  (Aside.) Now I will not tell her of Harold's death.  Agatha: 'Tis true I was justly punished and men  As a rule of pity have little share;  Had I died you had cared but little then.  Hugo: But little then yet now I should care  More than you think for. Now good-night.  Tears still? Ere I leave you child alone  Must I dry your cheeks?  Agatha: Nay I am not quite  Such a child but what I can dry my own.  (Hugo goes out. Agatha retires.)   Orion :(singing outside the window of Agatha's chamber)   'Neath the stems with blossoms laden  'Neath the tendrils curling  [253] I thy servant sing oh maiden!  I thy slave oh darling!  Lo! the shaft that slew the red deer  At the elk may fly too.  Spare them not! The dead are dead dear  Let the living die too.  Where the wiles of serpent mingle  And the looks of dove lie  Where small hands in strong hands tingle  Loving eyes meet lovely:  Where the harder natures soften  And the softer harden -  Certes! such things have been often  Since we left Eve's garden.  Sweeter follies herald sadder  Sins - look not too closely;  Tongue of asp and tooth of adder  Under leaf of rose lie.  Warned advised in vain abandon  Warning and advice too  Let the child lay wilful hand on  Den of cockatrice too.  I thy servant or thy master  One or both - no matter;  If the former - firmer faster  Surer still the latter -  Lull thee soothe thee with my singing  Bid thee sleep and ponder  On my lullabies still ringing  Through thy dreamland yonder.     [254] SCENE - A WOODED RISING GROUND NEAR THE RHINE. HUGO and AGATHA resting under the trees. THURSTON EUSTACE and followers a little apart. ORION. (Noonday.) The Towers of the Convent in the distance.   Agatha: I sit on the greensward and hear the bird sing  'Mid the thickets where scarlet and white blossoms cling;  And beyond the sweet uplands all golden with flower  It looms in the distance the grey convent tower.  And the emerald earth and the sapphire-hued sky  Keep telling me ever my spring has gone by;  Ah! spring premature they are tolling thy knell  In the wind's soft adieu in the bird's sweet farewell.  Oh! why is the greensward with garlands so gay  That I quail at the sight of my prison-house grey?  Oh! why is the bird's note so joyous and clear?  The caged bird must pine in a cage doubly drear.  Hugo: May the lances of Dagobert harry their house  If they coax or intimidate thee to take vows;  May the freebooters pillage their shrines should they dare  Touch with their scissors thy glittering hair.  [255] Our short and sweet journey now draws to an end  And homeward my sorrowful way I must wend;  Oh fair one! oh loved one! I would I were free  To squander my life in the greenwood with thee.  Orion :(aside) Ho! seeker of knowledge so grave and so wise  Touch her soft curl again - look again in her eyes;  Forget for the nonce musty parchments and learn  How the slow pulse may quicken - the cold blood may burn.  Ho! fair fickle maiden so blooming and shy!  The old love is dead let the old promise die!  Thou dost well thou dost wise take the word of Orion  "A living dog always before a dead lion!"  *  *  * * *  Thurston: Ye varlets I would I knew which of ye burst  Our wine-skin - what ho! must I perish with thirst!  Go Henry thou hast a glib tongue go and ask  Thy lord to send Ralph to yon inn for a flask.  Henry: Nay Thurston not so; I decline to disturb  Our lord for the present; go thou or else curb  Thy thirst or drink water as I do. [256]   Thurston: Thou knave  Of a page dost thou wish me the colic to have?  Orion :(aside) That clown is a thoroughbred Saxon. He thinks  With pleasure on naught save hard blows and strong drinks;  In hell he will scarce go athirst if once given  An inkling of any good liquors in heaven.  *  *  * * *  Hugo: Our Pontiff to manhood at Englemehr grew  The priests there are many the nuns are but few.  I love not the Abbot - 'tis needless to tell  My reason; but all of the Abbess speak well.  Agatha: Through vineyards and cornfields beneath us the Rhine  Spreads and winds silver-white in the merry sunshine;  And the air overcharged with a subtle perfume  Grows faint from the essence of manifold bloom.  Hugo: And the tinkling of bells and the bleating of sheep  And the chaunt from the fields where the labourers reap  The earlier harvest comes faint on the breeze  That whispers so faintly in hedgerows and trees. [257]   Orion: And a waggon wends slow to those turrets and spires  To feed the fat monks and the corpulent friars;  It carries the corn and the oil and the wine  The honey and milk from the shores of the Rhine.  The oxen are weary and spent with their load  They pause but the driver doth recklessly goad;  Up yon steep flinty rise they have staggered and reeled  Even devils may pity dumb beasts of the field.  Agatha :(sings) Oh! days and years departed  Vain hopes vain fears that smarted  I turn to you sad-hearted -  I turn to you in tears!  Your daily sun shone brightly  Your happy dreams came nightly  Flowers bloomed and birds sang lightly  Through all your hopes and fears!  You halted not nor tarried  Your hopes have all miscarried  And even your fears are buried  Since fear with hope must die.  You halted not but hasted  And flew past childhood wasted  And girlhood scarcely tasted  Now womanhood is nigh.  Yet I forgive your wronging  Dead seasons round me thronging  With yearning and with longing  I call your bitters sweet.  [258] Vain longing and vain yearning  There now is no returning;  Oh! beating heart and burning  Forget to burn and beat!  Oh! childish suns and showers  Oh! girlish thorns and flowers  Oh! fruitless days and hours  Oh! groundless hopes and fears:  The birds still chirp and twitter  And still the sunbeams glitter:  Oh! barren years and bitter  Oh! bitter barren years!     SCENE - THE SUMMIT OF A BURNING MOUNTAIN Night. A terrific storm. ORION (undisguised).   Orion :(sings) From fathomless depths of abysses  Where fires unquenchable burst  From the blackness of darkness where hisses  The brood of the serpent accurs'd;  From shrines where the hymns are the weeping  And wailing and gnashing of teeth  Where the palm is the pang never sleeping  Where the worm never dying is the wreath;  Where all fruits save wickedness wither  Whence naught save despair can be gleaned -  Come hither! come hither! come hither!  Fall'n angel fell sprite and foul fiend.  [259] Come hither! the bands are all broken  And loosed in hell's innermost womb  When the spell unpronounceable spoken  Divides the unspeakable gloom.  Evil Spirits approach. The storm increases.   Evil Spirits:(singing)   We hear thee we seek thee on pinions  That darken the shades of the shade;  Oh! Prince of the Air with dominions  Encompass'd with powers array'd  With majesty cloth'd as a garment  Begirt with a shadowy shine  Whose feet scorch the hill-tops that are meant  As footstools for thee and for thine.  Orion :(sings) How it swells through each pause of the thunder  And mounts through each lull of the gust  Through the crashing of crags torn asunder  And the hurtling of trees in the dust;  With a chorus of loud lamentations  With its dreary and hopeless refrain!  'Tis the cry of all tongues and all nations  That suffer and shudder in vain.  Evil Spirits :(singing) 'Tis the cry of all tongues and all nations;  Our song shall chime in with their strain;  Lost spirits blend their wild exultations  With the sighing of mortals in pain. [260]   Orion :(sings) With just light enough to see sorrows  In this world and terrors beyond  'Twixt the day's bitter pangs and the morrow's  Dread doubts to despair and despond  Man lingers through toils unavailing  For blessings that baffle his grasp;  To his cradle he comes with a wailing  He goes to his grave with a gasp.  Evil Spirits :(singing) His birth is a weeping and wailing  His death is a groan and a gasp;  O'er the seed of the woman prevailing  Thus triumphs the seed of the asp.     SCENE - CHAMBER OF A WAYSIDE INN. HUGO sitting alone. Evening.   Hugo: And now the parting is over  The parting should end the pain;  And the restless heart may recover  And so may the troubled brain.  I am sitting within the chamber  Whose windows look on the porch  Where the roses cluster and clamber;  We halted here on our march  With her to the convent going  And now I go back alone:  Ye roses budding and blowing  Ye heed not though she is flown. [261]   I remember the girlish gesture  The sportive and childlike grace  With which she crumpled and pressed your  Rose leaves to her rose-hued face.  Shall I think on her ways hereafter -  On those flashes of mirth and grief  On that April of tears and laughter  On our parting bitterly brief?  I remember the bell at sunrise  That sounded so solemnly  Bidding monk and prelate and nun rise;  I rose ere the sun was high.  Down the long dark dismal passage  To the door of her resting-place  I went on a farewell message  I trod with a stealthy pace.  There was no one there to see us  When she opened her chamber door.  "Miserere mei Deus"  Rang faint from the convent choir.  I remember the dark and narrow  And scantily-furnished room;  And the gleam like a golden arrow -  The gleam that lighted the gloom.  One couch one seat and one table  One window and only one -  It stands in the eastern gable  It faces the rising sun;  One ray shot through it and one light  On doorway and threshold played.  She stood within in the sunlight  I stood without in the shade.  [262] I remember that bright form under  The sheen of that slanting ray.  I spoke - "For life we must sunder  Let us sunder without delay.  Let us sever without preamble  As brother and sister part  For the sake of one pleasant ramble  That will live in at least one heart."  Still the choir in my ears rang faintly  In the distance dying away  Sweetly and sadly and saintly  Through arch and corridor grey!  And thus we parted for ever  Between the shade and the shine;  Not as brother and sister sever -  I fondled her hands in mine.  Still the choir in my ears rang deaden'd  And dull'd though audible yet;  And she redden'd and paled and redden'd -  Her lashes and lids grew wet.  Not as brother severs from sister  My lips clung fast to her lips;  She shivered and shrank when I kissed her.  On the sunbeam drooped the eclipse.  I remember little of the parting  With the Abbot down by the gate  My men were eager for starting;  I think he pressed me to wait.  From the lands where convent and glebe lie  From manors and Church's right  Where I fought temptation so feebly  I too felt eager for flight.  [263] Alas! the parting is over -  The parting but not the pain -  Oh! sweet was the purple clover  And sweet was the yellow grain;  And sweet were the woody hollows  On the summery Rhineward track;  But a winter untimely swallows  All sweets as I travel back.  Yet I feel assured in some fashion  Ere the hedges are crisp with rime  I shall conquer this senseless passion  'Twill yield to toil and to time.  I will fetter these fancies roaming;  Already the sun has dipped;  I will trim the lamps in the gloaming  I will finish my manuscript.  Through the nightwatch unflagging study  Shall banish regrets perforce;  As soon as the east is ruddy  Our bugle shall sound "To Horse!"     SCENE - Another wayside house near the Norman Frontier. HUGO and ORION in a chamber. Evening.   Orion: Your eyes are hollow your step is slow  And your cheek is pallid as though from toil  Watching or fasting by which I know  That you have been burning the midnight oil.  [264] Hugo: Aye three nights running.  Orion: 'Twill never do  To travel all day and study all night;  Will you join in a gallop through mist and dew  In a flight that may vie with the eagle's flight?  Hugo: With all my heart. Shall we saddle "Rollo"?  Orion: Nay leave him undisturb'd in his stall;  I have steeds he would hardly care to follow.  Hugo: Follow forsooth! he can lead them all.  Orion: Touching his merits we will not quarrel;  But let me mount you for once; enough  Of work may await your favourite sorrel  And the paths we must traverse to-night are rough.  But first let me mix you a beverage  To invigorate your enfeebled frame.  (He mixes a draught and hands it to Hugo.)   All human ills this draught can assuage.  Hugo: It hisses and glows like liquid flame;  Say what quack nostrum is this thou'st brewed?  Speak out; I am learned in the chemist's lore.  [265] Orion: There is nothing but what will do you good;  And the drugs are simples; 'tis hellebore  Nepenthe upas and dragon's blood  Absinthe and mandrake and mandragore.  Hugo: I will drink it although by mass and rood  I am just as wise as I was before.     SCENE - A ROUGH HILLY COUNTRY. HUGO and ORION riding at speed on black horses. Mountains in the distance. Night.   Hugo: See! the sparks that fly from our hoof-strokes make  A fiery track that gleams in our wake;  Like a dream the dim landscape past us shoots  Our horses fly.  Orion: They are useful brutes  Though somewhat skittish; the foam is whit'ning  The crest and rein of my courser "Lightning";  He pulls to-night being short of work  And takes his head with a sudden jerk;  Still heel and steady hand on the bit  For that is "Tempest" on which you sit.  Hugo: 'Tis the bravest steed that ever I back'd;  Did'st mark how he crossed yon cataract?  From hoof to hoof I should like to measure  The space he clear'd.  [266] Orion: He can clear at leisure  A greater distance. Observe the chasm  We are nearing. Ha! did you feel a spasm  As we flew over it?  Hugo: Not at all.  Orion: Nathless 'twas an ugly place for a fall.  Hugo: Let us try a race to yon mountain high  That rears its dusky peak 'gainst the sky.  Orion: I won't disparage your horsemanship  But your steed will stand neither spur nor whip  And is hasty and hard to steer at times.  We must travel far ere the midnight chimes;  We must travel back ere the east is grey.  Ho! "Lightning"! "Tempest"! Away! Away!  (They ride on faster.)      SCENE - A PEAK IN A MOUNTAINOUS COUNTRY OVERHANGING A ROCKY PASS. HUGO and ORION on black horses. Midnight.   Hugo: These steeds are sprung from no common race  Their vigour seems to annihilate space;  What hast thou brought me here to see?  [267] Orion: No boisterous scene of unhallow'd glee  No sabbat of witches coarse and rude  But a mystic and musical interlude;  You have long'd to explore the scrolls of Fate  Dismount as I do and listen and wait.  (They dismount.)   Orion :(chanting)   Spirits of earth and air and sea  Spirits unclean and spirits untrue  By the symbols three that shall nameless be  One of your masters calls on you.  Spirits :(chanting in the distance)   From the bowels of earth where gleams the gold;  From the air where the powers of darkness hold  Their court; from the white sea-foam  Whence the white rose-tinted goddess sprung  Whom poets of every age have sung  Ever we come! we come!  Hugo: How close to our ears the thunder peals!  How the earth beneath us shudders and reels!  A Voice (chanting):  Woe to the earth! Where men give death!  And women give birth!  To the sons of Adam by Cain or Seth!  Plenty and dearth!  To the daughters of Eve who toil and spin  Barren of worth!  Let them sigh and sicken and suffer sin!  Woe to the earth!  [268] Hugo: What is yon phantom large and dim  That over the mountain seems to swim?  Orion: 'Tis the scarlet woman of Babylon!  Hugo: Whence does she come? Where has she gone?  And who is she?  Orion: You would know too much;  These are subjects on which I dare not touch;  And if I were to try and enlighten you  I should probably fail and possibly frighten you.  You had better ask some learned divine  Whose opinion is p'rhaps worth as much as mine  In his own conceit; and who besides  Could tell you the brand of the beast she rides.  What can you see in the valley yonder?  Speak out; I can hear you for all the thunder.  Hugo: I see four shadowy altars rise  They seem to swell and dilate in size;  Larger and clearer now they loom  Now fires are lighting them through the gloom.  A Voice :(chanting) The first a golden-hued fire shows  A blood-red flame on the second glows  The blaze on the third is tinged like the rose  From the fourth a column of black smoke goes.  Orion: Can you see all this?  Hugo:I see and hear;  The lights and hues are vivid and clear.  Spirits :(sing at the first altar) Hail Mammon! while man buys and barters  Thy kingdom in this world is sure;  Thy prophets thou hast and thy martyrs  Great things in thy name they endure;  Thy fetters of gold crush the miser  The usurer bends at thy shrine  And the wealthier nations and the wiser  Bow with us at this altar of thine.  Spirits :(sing at the second altar)   Hail Moloch! whose banner floats blood-red  From pole to equator unfurl'd  Whose laws redly written have stood red  And shall stand while standeth this world;  Clad in purple with thy diadem gory  Thy sceptre the blood-dripping steel  Thy subjects with us give thee glory  With us at thine altar they kneel.  Spirits :(sing at the third altar)   Hail Sovereign! whose fires are kindled  By sparks from the bottomless pit  Has thy worship diminish'd or dwindled?  Do the yokes of thy slaves lightly sit?  Nay the men of all climes and all races  Are stirr'd by the flames that now stir us;  Then (as we do) they fall on their faces  Crying "Hear us! Oh! Ashtaroth hear us!"  [270] Spirits :(all in chorus) The vulture her carrion swallows  Returns to his vomit the dog.  In the slough of uncleanliness wallows  The he-goat and revels the hog.  Men are wise with their schools and their teachers  Men are just with their creeds and their priests;  Yet in spite of their pedants and preachers  They backslide in footprints of beasts!  Hugo: From the smoky altar there seems to come  A stifled murmur a droning hum.  Orion: With that we have nothing at all to do  Or at least not now neither I nor you;  Though some day or other possibly  We may see it closer both you and I;  Let us visit the nearest altar first  Whence the yellow fires flicker and burst  Like the flames from molten ore that spring;  We may stand in the pale of the outer ring  But forbear to trespass within the inner  Lest the sins of the past should find out the sinner.  (They approach the first altar and stand within the outer circle which surrounds it and near the inner.)   Spirits :(sing) Beneath us it flashes  The glittering gold  Though it turneth to ashes  And dross in the hold;  [271] Yet man will endeavour  By fraud or by strife  To grasp it and never  To yield it with life.  Orion: What can you see?  Hugo: Some decrepit shapes  That are neither dwarfs nor demons nor apes;  In the hollow earth they appear to store  And rake together great heaps of ore.  Orion: These are the gnomes coarse sprites and rough;  Come on of these we have seen enough.  (They approach second altar and stand as before.)   Spirits :(singing) Above us it flashes  The glittering steel  Though the red blood splashes  Where its victims reel;  Yet man will endeavour  To grapple the hilt  And to wield the blade ever  Till his life be spilt.  Orion: What see you now?  Hugo: A rocky glen  A horrid jumble of fighting men  And a face that somewhere I've seen before.  [272] Orion: Come on; there is naught worth seeing more  Except the altar of Ashtaroth.  Hugo: To visit that altar I am loth.  Orion: Why so?  Hugo: Nay I cannot fathom why  But I feel no curiosity.  Orion: Come on. Stand close to the inner ring  And hear how sweetly these spirits sing.  (They approach third altar.)   Spirits :(sing) Around us it flashes  The cestus of one  Born of white foam that dashes  Beneath the white sun;  Let the mortal take heart he  Has nothing to dare;  She is fair Queen Astarte  Her subjects are fair!  Orion: What see you now friend?  Hugo: Wood and wold  And forms that look like the nymphs of old.  There is nothing here worth looking at twice.  I have seen enough.  [273] Orion: You are far too nice;  Nevertheless you must look again.  Those forms will fade.  Hugo: They are growing less plain.  They vanish. I see a door that seems  To open; a ray of sunlight gleams  From a window behind; a vision as fair  As the flush of dawn is standing there.  (He gazes earnestly.)  Orion :(sings) Higher and hotter the white flames glow  And the adamant may be thaw'd like snow  And the life for a single chance may go  And the soul for a certainty.  Oh! vain and shallow philosopher  Dost feel them quicken dost feel them stir  The thoughts that have stray'd again to her  From whom thou hast sought to fly?  Lo! the furnace is heated till sevenfold;  Is thy brain still calm? Is thy blood still cold  To the curls that wander in ripples of gold  On the shoulders of ivory?  Do the large dark eyes and the small red mouth  Consume thine heart with a fiery drouth  Like the fierce sirocco that sweeps from the south  When the deserts are parch'd and dry?  Aye start and shiver and catch thy breath  The sting is certain the venom is death  And the scales are flashing the fruit beneath  And the fang striketh suddenly.  [274] At the core the ashes are bitter and dead  But the rind is fair and the rind is red  It has ever been pluck'd since the serpent said  Thou shalt not surely die.  (Hugo tries to enter the inner ring; Orion holds him back; they struggle.)   Hugo: Unhand me slave! or quail to the rod!  Agatha! Speak! in the name of God!  (The vision disappears; the altars vanish. Hugo falls insensible.)     SCENE - THE WAYSIDE HOUSE. HUGO waking in his chamber. ORION unseen at first. Morning.   Hugo: Vanish fair and fatal vision!  Fleeting shade of fever'd sleep  Chiding one whose indecision  Waking substance failed to keep;  Picture into life half starting  As in life once seen before  Parting somewhat sadly parting  Slowly at the chamber door.  Were my waking senses duller?  Have I seen with mental eye  Light and shade and warmth and colour  Plainer than reality?  [275] Sunlight that on tangled tresses  Every ripple gilds and tips;  Balm and bloom and breath of kisses  Warm on dewy scarlet lips.  Dark eyes veiling half their splendour  'Neath their lashes' darker fringe  Dusky dreamy deep and tender  Passing smile and passing tinge;  Dimpling fast and flushing faster  Ivory chin and coral cheek  Pearly strings by alabaster  Neck and arms made faint and weak;  Drooping downcast lids enduring  Gaze of man unwillingly;  Sudden sidelong gleams alluring  Partly arch and partly shy.  Do I bless or curse that beauty?  Am I longing am I loth?  Is it passion is it duty  That I strive with one or both?  Round about one fiery centre  Wayward thoughts like moths revolve.  (He sees Orion.)   Ha! Orion thou didst enter  Unperceived. I pray thee solve  These two questions: Firstly tell me  Must I strive for wrong or right?  Secondly what things befell me -  Facts or phantasies - last night?  [276] Orion: First your strife is all a sham you  Know as well as I which wins;  Second waking sins will damn you  Never mind your sleeping sins;  Both your questions thus I answer;  Listen ere you seek or shun:  I at least am no romancer  What you long for may be won.  Turn again and travel Rhineward  Tread once more the flowery path.  Hugo: Aye the flowery path that sinward  Pointing ends in sin and wrath.  Orion: Songs by love-birds lightly caroll'd  Even the just man may allure.  Hugo: To his shame; in this wise Harold  Sinn'd his punishment was sure.  Orion: Nay the Dane was worse than you are  Base and pitiless to boot;  Doubtless all are bad yet few are  Cruel false and dissolute.  Hugo: Some sins foreign to our nature  Seem; we take no credit when  We escape them.  [277] Orion: Yet the creature  Sin-created lives to sin.  Hugo: Be it so; come good come evil  Ride we to the Rhine again!  Orion :(aside) 'Gainst the logic of the devil  Human logic strives in vain.     SCENE - A CAMP NEAR THE BLACK FOREST. RUDOLPH OSRIC DAGOBERT and followers. ORION disguised as one of the Free-lances. Mid-day.   Osric: Now by axe of Odin and hammer of Thor  And by all the gods of the Viking's war  I swear we have quitted our homes in vain:  We have nothing to look to glory nor gain.  Will our galley return to Norway's shore  With heavier gold or with costlier store?  Will our exploits furnish the scald with a song?  We have travell'd too far we have tarried too long.  Say captains all is there ever a village  For miles around that is worth the pillage?  Will it pay the costs of my men or yours  To harry the homesteads of German boors?  Have we cause for pride in our feats of arms  When we plunder the peasants or sack the farms?  I tell thee Rudolph of Rothenstein  That were thy soldiers willing as mine  [278] And I sole leader of this array  I would give Prince Otto battle this day.  Dost thou call thy followers men of war?  Oh Dagobert! thou whose ancestor  On the neck of the Caesar's offspring trod  Who was justly surnamed "The Scourge of God".  Yet in flight lies safety. Skirmish and run  To forest and fastness Teuton and Hun  From the banks of the Rhine to the Danube's shore  And back to the banks of the Rhine once more;  Retreat from the face of an armed foe  Robbing garden and hen-roost where'er you go.  Let the short alliance betwixt us cease  I and my Norsemen will go in peace!  I wot it never will suit with us  Such existence tame and inglorious;  I could live no worse living single-handed  And better with half my men disbanded.  Rudolph: Jarl Osric what would'st thou have me do?  'Gainst Otto's army our men count few;  With one chance of victory fight say I!  But not when defeat is a certainty.  If Rudiger joins us with his free-lances  Our chance will be equal to many chances;  For Rudiger is both prompt and wary;  And his men are gallant though mercenary;  But the knave refuses to send a lance  Till half the money is paid in advance.  Dagobert: May his avarice wither him like a curse!  I guess he has heard of our late reverse;  [279] But Rudolph whether he goes or stays  There is reason in what Jarl Osric says;  Of provisions we need a fresh supply  And our butts and flasks are shallow or dry;  My men are beginning to grumble sadly  'Tis no wonder since they must fare so badly.  Rudolph: We have plenty of foragers out and still  We have plenty of hungry mouths to fill;  And moreover by some means foul or fair  We must raise money; 'tis little I care  So long as we raise it whence it comes.  Osric: Shall we sit till nightfall biting our thumbs?  The shortest plan is ever the best;  Has anyone here got aught to suggest?  Orion: The cornfields are golden that skirt the Rhine  Fat are the oxen strong is the wine  In those pleasant pastures those cellars deep  That o'erflow with the tears that those vineyards weep;  Is it silver you stand in need of or gold?  Ingot or coin? There is wealth untold  In the ancient convent of Englemehr;  That is not so very far from here.  The Abbot esteem'd a holy man  Will hold what he has and grasp what he can;  The cream of the soil he loves to skim  Why not levy a contribution on him?  [280] Dagobert: The stranger speaks well; not far away  That convent lies; and one summer's day  Will suffice for a horseman to reach the gate;  The garrison soon would capitulate  Since the armed retainers are next to none  And the walls I wot may be quickly won.  Rudolph: I kept those walls for two months or more  When they feared the riders of Melchior!  That was little over three years ago.  Their Abbot is thrifty as well I know;  He haggled sorely about the price  Of our service.  Dagobert: Rudolph he paid thee twice.  Rudolph: Well what of that? Since then I've tried  To borrow from him; now I know he lied  When he told me he could not spare the sum  I asked. If we to his gates should come  He could spare it though it were doubled; and still  This war with the Church I like it ill.  Osric: The creed of our fathers is well-nigh dead  And the creed of the Christian reigns in its stead  But the creed of the Christian too may die  For your creeds or your churches what care I!  If there be plunder at Englemehr  Let us strike our tents and thitherward steer.     [281] SCENE - A FARM-HOUSE ON THE RHINE (About a mile from the Convent.) HUGO in chamber alone. Enter ERIC.   Eric: What Hugo still at the Rhine! I thought  You were home. You have travell'd by stages short.  Hugo :(with hesitation) Our homeward march was labour in vain  We had to retrace our steps again;  It was here or hereabouts that I lost  Some papers of value; at any cost  I must find them; and which way lies your course?  Eric: I go to recruit Prince Otto's force.  I cannot study as you do; I  Am wearied with inactivity;  So I carry a blade engrim'd with rust  (That a hand sloth-slacken'd has I trust  Not quite forgotten the way to wield)  To strike once more on the tented field.  Hugo: Fighting is all a mistake friend Eric  And has been so since the age Homeric  When Greece was shaken and Troy undone  Ten thousand lives for a worthless one.  Yet I blame you not; you might well do worse;  Better fight and perish than live to curse  [282] The day you were born; and such has been  The lot of many and shall I ween  Be the lot of more. If Thurston chooses  He may go with you. The blockhead abuses  Me and the life I lead.  Enter ORION.   Orion: Great news!  The Englemehr monks will shake in their shoes;  In the soles of their callous feet will shake  The barefooted friars. The nuns will quake.  Hugo: Wherefore?  Orion: The outlaw of Rothenstein  Has come with his soldiers to the Rhine  Back'd by those hardy adventurers  From the northern forests of pines and firs  And Dagobert's horse. They march as straight  As the eagle swoops to the convent gate.  Hugo: We must do something to save the place.  Orion: They are sure to take it in any case  Unless the sum that they ask is paid.  Eric: Some effort on our part must be made.  Hugo: 'Tis not so much for the monks I care.  Eric: Nor I; but the Abbess and nuns are there.  [283] Orion: 'Tis not our business; what can we do?  They are too many and we are too few;  And yet I suppose you will save if you can  That lady your ward or your kinswoman.  Hugo: She is no kinswoman of mine;  How far is Otto's camp from the Rhine?  Orion: Too far for help in such time of need  To be brought though you used your utmost speed.  Eric: Nay that I doubt.  Hugo: And how many men  Have they?  Orion: To your one they could muster ten.  Eric: I know Count Rudolph and terms may be made  With him I fancy; for though his trade  Is a rough one now gainsay it who can  He was once a knight and a gentleman.  And Dagobert the chief of the Huns  Bad as he is will spare the nuns;  Though neither he nor the Count could check  Those lawless men should they storm and sack  The convent. Jarl Osric too I know;  He is rather a formidable foe  And will likely enough be troublesome;  But the others I trust to terms will come.  Hugo: Eric how many men have you?  I can count a score.  Eric: I have only two.  Hugo: At every hazard we must try to save the nuns.  Eric: Count Rudolph shall think we have  A force that almost equals his own  If I can confer with him alone.  Orion: He is close at hand; by this time he waits  The Abbot's reply at the convent gates.  Hugo: We had better send him a herald.  Eric: Nay I will go myself. (Eric goes out.)  Hugo: Orion stay!  So this is the reed on which I've leaned  These are the hopes thou hast fostered these  The flames thou hast fanned. Oh lying fiend!  Is it thus thou dost keep thy promises?  Orion: Strong language Hugo and most unjust;  You will cry out before you are hurt -  You will live to recall your words I trust.  Fear nothing from Osric or Dagobert  These are your friends if you only knew it  And would take the advice of a friend sincere;  [285] Neglect his counsels and you must rue it  For I know by a sign the crisis is near.  Accept the terms of these outlaws all  And be thankful that things have fallen out  Exactly as you would have had them fall -  You may save the one that you care about;  Otherwise how did you hope to gain  Access to her - on what pretence?  What were the schemes that worried your brain  To tempt her there or to lure her thence?  You must have bungled and raised a scandal  About your ears that might well have shamed  The rudest Hun the veriest Vandal  Long or ever the bird was tamed.  Hugo: The convent is scarce surrounded yet  We might reach and hold it against their force  Till another sun has risen and set;  And should I despatch my fleetest horse  To Otto --  Orion: For Abbot or Monk or Friar  Between ourselves 'tis little you care  If their halls are harried by steel and fire:  Their avarice left your heritage bare.  Forsake them! Mitres and cowls and hoods  Will cover vices while earth endures;  Through the green and gold of the summer woods  Ride out with that pretty bird of yours.  If again you fail to improve your chance  Why then my friend I can only say  You are duller far than the dullest lance  That rides in Dagobert's troop this day.  [286] "Faemina semper" frown not thus  The girl was always giddy and wild  Vain and foolish and frivolous  Since she fled from her father's halls a child.  I sought to initiate you once  In the mystic lore of the old Chaldean;  But I found you far too stubborn a dunce  And your tastes are coarser and more plebeian.  Yet mark my words for I read the stars  And trace the future in yonder sky;  To the right are wars and rumours of wars  To the left are peace and prosperity.  Fear naught. The world shall never detect  The cloven hoof so carefully hid  By the scholar so staid and circumspect  So wise for once to do as he's bid.  Remember what pangs come year by year  For opportunity that has fled;  And Thora in ignorance.  Hugo: Name not her!  I am sorely tempted to strike thee dead!  Orion: Nay I hardly think you will take my life  The angel Michael was once my foe;  He had a little the best of our strife  Yet he never could deal so stark a blow.     [207] SCENE - A CHAMBER IN THE NUNS APARTMENTS OF THE CONVENT. AGATHA AND URSULA   Agatha: My sire in my childhood pledged my hand  To Hugo - I know not why -  They were comrades then 'neath the Duke's command  In the wars of Lombardy.  I thought ere my summers had turned sixteen  That mine was a grievous case;  Save once for an hour I had never seen  My intended bridegroom's face;  And maidens vows of their own will plight.  Unknown to my kinsfolk all  My love was vowed to a Danish knight  A guest in my father's hall.  His foot fell lightest in merry dance  His shaft never missed the deer;  He could fly a hawk he could wield a lance  Our wildest colt he could steer.  His deep voice ringing through hall or glen  Had never its match in song;  And little was known of his past life then  Or of Dorothea's wrong.  I loved him - Lady Abbess I know  That my love was foolish now;  I was but a child five years ago  And thoughtless as bird on bough.  One evening Hugo the Norman came  And to shorten a weary tale  [288] I fled that night (let me bear the blame)  With Harold by down and dale.  He had mounted me on a dappled steed  And another of coal-black hue  He rode himself; and away at speed  We fled through mist and dew.  Of miles we had ridden some half a score  We had halted beside a spring  When the breeze to our ears through the still night bore  A distant trample and ring;  We listen'd one breathing space and caught  The clatter of mounted men  With vigour renewed by their respite short  Our horses dash'd through the glen.  Another league and we listen'd in vain;  The breeze to our ears came mute;  But we heard them again on the spacious plain  Faint tidings of hot pursuit.  In the misty light of a moon half hid  By the dark or fleecy rack  Our shadows over the moorland slid  Still listening and looking back.  So we fled (with a cheering word to say  At times as we hurried on)  From sounds that at intervals died away  And at intervals came anon.  Another league and my lips grew dumb  And I felt my spirit quailing  For closer those sounds began to come  And the speed of my horse was failing.  "The grey is weary and lame to boot"  Quoth Harold; "the black is strong  [289] And their steeds are blown with their fierce pursuit  What wonder! our start was long.  Now lady behind me mount the black  The double load he can bear;  We are safe when we reach the forest track  Fresh horses and friends wait there."  Then I sat behind him and held his waist  And faster we seemed to go  By moss and moor; but for all our haste  Came the tramp of the nearing foe.  A dyke through the mist before us hover'd  And quicken'd by voice and heel  The black overleap'd it stagger'd recover'd;  Still nearer that muffled peal.  And louder on sward the hoof-strokes grew  And duller though not less nigh  On deader sand; and a dark speck drew  On my vision suddenly  And a single horseman in fleet career  Like a shadow appear'd to glide  To within six lances' lengths of our rear  And there for a space to bide.  Quoth Harold "Speak has the moon reveal'd  His face?" I replied "Not so!  Yet 'tis none of my kinsfolk." Then he wheel'd  In the saddle and scanned the foe  And mutter'd still gazing in our wake  "'Tis he; now I will not fight  The brother again for the sister's sake  While I can escape by flight."  "Who Harold?" I asked; but he never spoke.  By the cry of the bittern harsh  And the bull-frog's dull discordant croak  I guess'd that we near'd the marsh;  [290] And the moonbeam flash'd on watery sedge  As it broke from a strip of cloud  Ragged and jagged about the edge  And shaped like a dead man's shroud.  And flagg'd and falter'd our gallant steed  'Neath the weight of his double burden  As we splash'd through water and crash'd through reed;  Then the soil began to harden  And again we gain'd or we seem'd to gain  With our foe in the deep morass;  But those fleet hoofs thunder'd and gain'd again  When they trampled the firmer grass  And I cried and Harold again look'd back  And bade me fasten mine eyes on  The forest that loom'd like a patch of black  Standing out from the faint horizon.  "Courage sweetheart! we are saved" he said;  "With the moorland our danger ends  And close to the borders of yonder glade  They tarry our trusty friends."  Where the mossy uplands rise and dip  On the edge of the leafy dell  With a lurch like the lurch of a sinking ship  The black horse toppled and fell.  Unharm'd we lit on the velvet sward  And even as I lit I lay  But Harold uprose unsheath'd his sword  And toss'd the scabbard away.  And spake through his teeth "Good brother-in-law  Forbearance at last is spent;  The strife that thy soul hath lusted for  Thou shalt have to thy soul's content!"  [291] While he spoke our pursuer past us swept  Ere he rein'd his war-horse proud  To his haunches flung then to the earth he leapt  And my lover's voice rang loud:  "Thrice welcome! Hugo of Normandy  Thou hast come at our time of need  This lady will thank thee and so will I  For the loan of thy sorrel steed!"  And never a word Lord Hugo said  They clos'd 'twixt the wood and the wold  And the white steel flickered over my head  In the moonlight calm and cold;  'Mid the feathery grasses crouching low  With face bow'd down to the dust  I heard the clash of each warded blow  The click of each parried thrust  And the shuffling feet that bruis'd the lawn  As they traversed here and there  And the breath through the clench'd teeth heavily drawn  When breath there was none to spare;  Sharp ringing sword play dull trampling heel  Short pause spent force to regain  Quick muffled footfall harsh grating steel  Sharp ringing rally again;  They seem'd long hours those moments fleet  As I counted them one by one  Till a dead weight toppled across my feet  And I knew that the strife was done.  When I looked up after a little space  As though from a fearful dream  The moon was flinging on Harold's face  A white and a weird-like gleam;  [292] And I felt mine ankles moist and warm  With the blood that trickled slow  From a spot on the doublet beneath his arm  From a ghastly gash on his brow;  I heard the tread of the sorrel's hoof  As he bore his lord away;  They passed me slowly keeping aloof  Like spectres misty and grey.  I thought Lord Hugo had left me there  To die but it was not so;  Yet then for death I had little care  My soul seem'd numb'd by the blow;  A faintness follow'd a sickly swoon  A long and a dreamless sleep  And I woke to the light of a sultry noon  In my father's castled keep.  And thus Lady Abbess it came to pass  That my father vow'd his vow;  Must his daughter espouse the Church? Alas!  Is she better or wiser now?  For some are feeble and others strong  And feeble am I and frail.  Mother! 'tis not that I love the wrong  'Tis not that I loathe the veil  But with heart still ready to go astray  If assail'd by a fresh temptation  I could sin again as I sinned that day  For a girl's infatuation.  See! Harold the Dane thou say'st is dead  Yet I weep not bitterly;  As I fled with the Dane so I might have fled  With Hugo of Normandy.  [293] Ursula: My child I advise no hasty vows  Yet I pray that in life's brief span  Thou may'st learn that our Church is a fairer spouse  Than fickle and erring man;  Though fenced for a time by the Church's pale  When that time expires thou'rt free;  And we cannot force thee to take the veil  Nay we scarce can counsel thee.  Enter the ABBOT hastily.   Basil (the Abbot): I am sorely stricken with shame and grief  It has come by the self-same sign  A summons brief from the outlaw'd chief  Count Rudolph of Rothenstein.  Lady Abbess ere worse things come to pass  I would speak with thee alone;  Alack and alas! for by the rood and mass  I fear we are all undone.     SCENE - A FARM-HOUSE NEAR THE CONVENT. A Chamber furnished with writing materials. HUGO ERIC and THURSTON on one side; on the other OSRIC RUDOLPH and DAGOBERT.   Osric: We have granted too much ye ask for more;  I am not skill'd in your clerkly lore  I scorn your logic; I had rather die  Than live like Hugo of Normandy:  I am a Norseman frank and plain;  Ye must read the parchment over again.  Eric: Jarl Osric twice we have read this scroll.  Osric: Thou hast read a part.  Eric: I have read the whole.  Osric: Aye since I attached my signature!  Eric: Before and since!  Rudolph: Nay of this be sure  Thou hast signed; in fairness now let it rest.  Osric: I had rather have sign'd upon Hugo's crest;  He has argued the question mouth to mouth  With the wordy lore of the subtle south;  Let him or any one of his band  Come and argue the question hand to hand.  With the aid of my battle-axe I will show  That a score of words are not worth one blow.  Thurston: To the devil with thee and thy battle-axe;  I would send the pair of ye back in your tracks  With an answer that even to thy boorish brain  Would scarce need repetition again.  Osric: Thou Saxon slave to a milksop knight  I will give thy body to raven and kite.  [295] Thurston: Thou liest; I am a freeborn man  And thy huge carcase - in cubit and span  Like the giant's of Gath - 'neath Saxon steel  Shall furnish the kites with a fatter meal.  Osric: Now by Odin!  Rudolph: Jarl Osric curb thy wrath;  Our names are sign'd our words have gone forth.  Hugo: I blame thee Thurston.  Thurston: And I too blame  Myself since I follow a knight so tame!  (Thurston goes out.)  Osric: The Saxon hound he said I lied!  Rudolph: I pray thee good Viking be pacified.  Osric: Why do we grant the terms they ask?  To crush them all were an easy task.  Dagobert: That know'st thou not; if it come to war  They are stronger perhaps than we bargain for.  Eric: Jarl Osric thou may'st recall thy words -  Should we meet again.  Osric: Should we meet with swords  Thou too may'st recall them to thy sorrow.  Hugo: Eric! we dally. Sir Count good-morrow.     [296] SCENE - THE GUEST CHAMBER OF THE CONVENT. HUGO ERIC and ORION.   Eric: Hugo their siege we might have tried;  This place would be easier fortified  Than I thought at first; it is now too late  They have cut off our access to the gate.  Hugo: I have weigh'd the chances and counted the cost  And I know by the stars that all is lost  If we take up this quarrel.  Eric: So let it be!  I yield to one who is wiser than me. (Aside.)  Nevertheless I have seen the day  When the stars would scarcely have bade us stay.  Enter the ABBOT CYRIL and other Monks.   Hugo: Lord Abbot we greet thee. Good fathers all  We bring you greeting.  Orion :(aside)  And comfort small.  Abbot: God's benediction on you my sons.  Hugo: May He save you too from Norsemen and Huns!  Since the gates are beleaguer'd and walls begirt  By the forces of Osric and Dagobert;  'Tis a heavy price that the knaves demand.  [297] Abbot: Were we to mortgage the Church's land  We never could raise what they would extort.  Orion :(aside) The price is too long and the notice too short.  Eric: And you know the stern alternative.  Abbot: If we die we die if we live we live;  God's will be done; and our trust is sure  In Him though His chast'nings we endure.  Two messengers rode from here last night  To Otto they carry news of our plight;  On my swiftest horses I saw them go.  Orion : (aside) Then his swiftest horses are wondrous slow.  Eric: One of these is captive and badly hurt;  By the reckless riders of Dagobert  He was overtaken and well-nigh slain  Not a league from here on the open plain.  Abbot: But the other escap'd.  Eric: It may be so;  We had no word of him but we know  That unless you can keep these walls for a day  At least the Prince is too far away  To afford relief.  Abbot: Then a hopeless case  Is ours and with death we are face to face.  [298] Eric: You have arm'd retainers.  Cyril (a Monk): Aye some half score;  And some few of the brethren less or more  Have in youth the brunt of the battle bided  Yet our armoury is but ill provided.  Hugo: We have terms of truce from the robbers in chief  Though the terms are partial the truce but brief;  To Abbess to nuns and novices all  And to every woman within your wall  We can offer escort and they shall ride  From hence in safety whate'er betide.  Abbot: What escort Hugo canst thou afford?  Hugo: Some score of riders who call me lord  Bide at the farm not a mile from here  Till we rejoin them they will not stir;  My page and armourer wait below  And all our movements are watch'd by the foe.  Strict stipulation was made of course  That except ourselves neither man nor horse  Should enter your gates - they were keen to shun  The chance of increasing your garrison.  Eric: I hold safe conduct here in my hand  Signed by the chiefs of that lawless band;  See Rudolph's name no disgrace to a clerk  And Dagobert's scrawl and Osric's mark;  Jarl signed sorely against his will  With a scratch like the print of a raven's bill;  [299] But the foe have muster'd in sight of the gate.  For another hour they will scarcely wait;  Bid Abbess and dame prepare with haste.  Hugo: Lord Abbot I tell thee candidly  There is no great love between thou and I  As well thou know'st; but nevertheless  I would we were more or thy foes were less.  Abbot: I will summon the Lady Abbess straight.  (The Abbot and Monks go out.)   Eric: 'Tis hard to leave these men to their fate  Norsemen and Hun will never relent;  Their day of grace upon earth is spent.  (Hugo goes out followed by Orion.)      SCENE - THE CORRIDOR OUTSIDE THE GUEST CHAMBER. HUGO pacing up and down. ORION leaning against the wall.   Hugo: My day of grace with theirs is past.  I might have saved them; 'tis too late -  Too late for both. The die is cast  And I resign me to my fate.  God's vengeance I await.  Orion: The boundary 'twixt right and wrong  Is not so easy to discern;  [300] And man is weak and fate is strong  And destiny man's hopes will spurn  Man's schemes will overturn.  Hugo: Thou liest thou fiend! Not unawares  The sinner swallows Satan's bait  Nor pits conceal'd nor hidden snares  Seeks blindly; wherefore dost thou prate  Of destiny and fate?  Orion: Who first named fate? But never mind  Let that pass by - to Adam's fall  And Adam's curse look back and find  Iniquity the lot of all  And sin original.  Hugo: But I have sinn'd repented sinn'd  Till seven times that sin may be  By seventy multiplied; the wind  Is constant when compared with me  And stable is the sea!  My hopes are sacrificed for what?  For days of folly less or more  For years to see those dead hopes rot  Like dead weeds scatter'd on the shore  Beyond the surfs that roar!  Orion: The wiles of Eve are swift to smite;  Aye swift to smite and not to spare -  Red lips and round limbs sweet and white  Dark eyes and sunny silken hair  Thy betters may ensnare.  [301] Hugo: Not so; the strife 'twixt hell and heaven  I felt last night and well I knew  The crisis; but my aid was given  To hell. Thou'st known the crisis too  For once thou'st spoken true.  Having foretold it there remains  For grace no time for hope no room;  Even now I seem to feel the pains  Of hell that wait beyond the gloom  Of my dishonour'd tomb.  Thou who hast lived and died to save  Us sinners Christ of Galilee!  Thy great love pardon'd and forgave  The dying thief upon the tree  Thou canst not pardon me!  Dear Lord! hear Thou my latest prayer  For prayer must die since hope is dead;  Thy Father's vengeance let me bear  Nor let my guilt be visited  Upon a guiltless head!  Ah! God is just! Full sure I am  He never did predestinate  Our souls to hell. Ourselves we damn -  (To Orion with sudden passion)   Serpent! I know thee now too late;  Curse thee! Work out thy hate!  Orion: I hate thee not; thy grievous plight  Would move my pity but I bear  A curse to which thy curse seems light!  [302] Thy wrong is better than my right  My day is darker than thy night;  Beside the whitest hope I share  How white is thy despair!     SCENE - THE CHAPEL OF THE CONVENT. URSULA AGATHA Nuns and Novices.   (Hymn of the Nuns): Jehovah! we bless Thee  All works of Thine hand  Extol Thee confess Thee;  By sea and by land  By mountain and river  By forest and glen  They praise Thee for ever!  And ever! Amen!  The heathen are raging  Against Thee O Lord!  The ungodly are waging  Rash war against God!  Arise and deliver  Us sheep of Thy pen  Who praise Thee for ever!  And ever! Amen!  Thou Shepherd of Zion!  Thy firstlings didst tear  From jaws of the lion  From teeth of the bear;  [303] Thy strength to deliver  Is strong now as then.  We praise Thee for ever!  And ever! Amen!  Thine arm hath delivered  Thy servants of old  Hath scatter'd and shiver'd  The spears of the bold  Hath emptied the quiver  Of bloodthirsty men.  We praise Thee for ever!  And ever! Amen!  Nathless shall Thy right hand  Those counsels fulfil  Most wise in Thy sight and  We bow to Thy will;  Thy children quail never  For dungeon or den  They praise Thee for ever!  And ever! Amen!  Though fierce tribulation  Endure for a space  Yet God! our salvation!  We gain by Thy grace  At end of life's fever  Bliss passing man's ken;  There to praise Thee for ever!  And ever! Amen!     [304] SCENE - The guest room of the convent. HUGO ERIC and ORION. Enter URSULA AGATHA and Nuns.   Ursula: Hugo we reject thine offers  Not that we can buy  Safety from the Church's coffers  Neither can we fly.  Far too great the price they seek is  Let their lawless throng  Come we wait their coming; weak is  Man but God is strong.  Eric: Think again on our proposals:  It will be too late  When the robbers hold carousals  On this side the gate.  Ursula: For myself I speak and others  Weak and frail as I;  We will not desert our brothers  In adversity.  Hugo :(to the Nuns) Does the Abbess thus advance her  Will before ye all?  A Nun: We will stay.  Hugo: Is this thine answer  Agatha? The wall  [305] Is a poor protection truly  And the gates are weak  And the Norsemen most unruly.  Come then.  A Nun :(To Agatha) Sister speak!  Orion :(aside to Hugo)   Press her! She her fears dissembling  Stands irresolute;  She will yield - her limbs are trembling  Though her lips are mute.  (A trumpet is heard without.)   Eric: Hark! their savage war-horn blowing  Chafes at our delay.  Hugo: Agatha we must be going.  Come girl!  Agatha :(clinging to Ursula) Must I stay?  Ursula: Nay my child thou shalt not make me  Judge; I cannot give  Orders to a novice.  Agatha: Take me  Hugo! Let me live!  Eric :(To Nuns) Foolish women! will ye tarry  Spite of all we say?  Hugo: Must we use our strength and carry  You by force away?  [306] Ursula: Bad enough thou art Sir Norman  Yet thou wilt not do  This thing. Shame! - on men make war man  Not on women few.  Eric: Heed her not - her life she barters  Of her free accord  For her faith; and doubtless martyrs  Have their own reward.  Ursula: In the Church's cause thy father  Never grudged his blade -  Hugo did he rue it?  Orion: Rather!  He was poorly paid.  Hugo: Abbess this is not my doing;  I have said my say;  How can I avert the ruin  Even for a day  Since they count two hundred fairly  While we count a score;  And thine own retainers barely  Count a dozen more?  Agatha :(kneeling to Ursula)   Ah! forgive me Lady Abbess  Bless me ere I go;  She who under sod and slab is  Lying cold and low  Scarce would turn away in anger  From a child so frail;  [307] Not dear life but deadly danger  Makes her daughter quail.  Hugo: Eric will those faces tearful  To God's judgment seat  Haunt us?  Eric: Death is not so fearful.  Hugo: No but life is sweet -  Sweet for once to me though sinful.  Orion :(to Hugo) Earth is scant of bliss;  Wisest he who takes his skinful  When the chance is his.  (To Ursula)  Lady Abbess! stay and welcome  Osric's savage crew;  Yet when pains of death and hell come  Thou thy choice may'st rue.  Ursula :(To Orion) What dost thou 'neath roof-trees sacred?  Man or fiend depart!  Orion: Dame thy tongue is sharp and acrid  Yet I bear the smart.  Ursula : (advancing and raising up a crucifix)   I conjure thee by this symbol  Leave us!  (Orion goes out hastily.) [308]   Hugo: Ha! the knave  He has made an exit nimble;  Abbess! thou art brave.  Yet once gone we're past recalling  Let no blame be mine.  See thy sisters' tears are falling  Fast and so are thine.  Ursula: Fare you well! The teardrop splashes  Vainly on the ice.  Ye will sorrow o'er our ashes  And your cowardice.  Eric: Sorry am I yet my sorrow  Cannot alter fate;  Should Prince Otto come to-morrow  He will come too late.  Hugo: Nay old comrade she hath spoken  Words we must not hear;  Shall we pause for sign or token -  Taunted twice with fear?  Yonder hilt to hilt adjusted  Stand the swords in which we trusted  Years ago. Their blades have rusted  So perchance have we.  Ursula! thy words may shame us  Yet we once were counted famous  Morituri salutamus  Aut victuri te!(They go out.)     [309] SCENE - THE OUTSKIRTS OF RUDOLPH'S CAMP. RUDOLPH OSRIC and DAGOBERT. HUGO.   Rudolph: Lord Hugo! thy speech is madness;  Thou hast tax'd our patience too far;  We offer'd thee peace - with gladness  We gladly accept thy war.  Dagobert: And the clemency we extended  To thee and thine we recall;  And the treaty 'twixt us is ended -  We are ready to storm the wall.  Osric: Now tear yon parchment to tatters;  Thou shalt make no further use  Of our safeguard; the wind that scatters  The scroll shall scatter the truce.  Hugo: Jarl Osric to save the spilling  Of blood and the waste of life  I am willing if thou art willing  With thee to decide this strife;  Let thy comrades draw their force back;  I defy thee to single fight  I will meet thee on foot or horseback  And God shall defend the right.  Rudolph: No single combat shall settle  This strife; thou art overbold -  [310] Thou hast put us all on our mettle  Now the game in our hands we hold.  Dagobert: Our lances round thee have hover'd  Have seen where thy fellows bide;  Thy weakness we have discover'd  Thy nakedness we have spied.  Osric: And hearken knight to my story -  When sack'd are the convent shrines  When the convent thresholds are gory  And quaff'd are the convent wines:  When our beasts with pillage are laden  And the clouds of our black smoke rise  From yon tower one fair-haired maiden  Is singled as Osric's prize.  I will fit her with chain and collar  Of red gold studded with pearls;  With bracelet of gold Sir Scholar  The queen of my captive girls.  Hugo :(savagely) May the Most High God of battles  The Lord and Ruler of fights  Who breaketh the shield that rattles  Who snappeth the sword that smites  In whose hands are footmen and horsemen  At whose breath they conquer or flee  Never show me His mercy Norseman!  If I show mercy to thee.  Osric: What ho! art thou drunk Sir Norman?  Has the wine made thy pale cheek red?  [311] Now I swear by Odin and Thor man  Already I count thee dead.  Rudolph: I crave thy pardon for baulking  The flood of thine eloquence  But thou canst not scare us with talking  I therefore pray thee go hence.  Osric: Though I may not take up thy gauntlet  Should we meet where the steel strikes fire  'Twixt thy casque and thy charger's frontlet  The choice will perplex thy squire.  Hugo: When the Norman rowels are goading  When glitters the Norman glaive  Thou shalt call upon Thor and Odin:  They shall not hear thee nor save.  "Should we meet!" Aye the chance may fall so  In the furious battle drive  So may God deal with me - more also!  If we separate both alive!   MR PARKES said: I am sure I express the feelings of my colleague as well as of myself when I say that we are deeply gratified by the kind and cordial manner in which you have drunk this toast. We were told when we were invited to this entertainment that the gentlemen inviting us were colonists of New South Wales - gentlemen having a deep interest in the prosperity of that colony. This circumstance invests the present gathering with peculiar interest because we ought not to forget - and I admit it freely and generously - that we are assembled in the capital of another colony which is at the same time the greatest city in Australasia. The circumstance that we the members of the Government of New South Wales - the parent of all the colonies - are met in this room in so cordial a manner by our fellow colonists is one that I regard with special interest. In returning thanks for the compliment you have paid us I set a special value Upon this circumstance. Our worthy friend the chairman - and I am sure you must be wise men to place this gentleman in the chair - has told us pretty distinctly the occupation in which you are all engaged. [438] I give our worthy friend the utmost credit for ingenuity and good nature; but if he expects me to make any serious revelations regarding the land policy of the Government I fear he will be disappointed. If in the exercise of his bounteous good nature he has any design of tying me to a buggy and carrying me on to Fort Bourke in order that I may acquire a knowledge of Riverine interests all I can say is he will not catch me on the other side of the Murray. I appreciate his kindness but would rather be excused from his services. Gentlemen considering the few opportunities that I have had of understanding the country with which you are more particularly identified considering that I have no personal interest in common with yours I think there are few persons who have shown more consideration for the exceptional circumstances of the Border districts or more sincere anxiety to do all that can be fairly done to place you on a level with the people of the other portions of New South Wales. On the question of the Border duties I have always felt very strongly the impolicy of collecting those duties along the River Murray. Years ago before they were collected in accordance with law - for nothing could be more irregular than their collection at that time - I felt that if continued for any length of time they would be fraught with such serious evils that it would be better to lose the revenue than risk the danger of their collection. I have always regarded the establishment of inland Custom-houses as a positive evil which no circumstances could to any great extent modify or decrease and I would rather have assented to any imaginable arrangements than see a whole body of custom-house officers stationed along the narrow river dividing the territory of Victoria from New South Wales. We know that the duties entrusted to officers at a remote distance from the central authority are seldom well performed; but however well they may be carried out they must necessarily and inevitably lead to bickerings to bad feeling to much of that kind of evasion of the law which if it goes on for any length of time settles down into the inveterate vice of smuggling; and rather than see a numerous class of petty smugglers disseminating the virus of their bad habits and disaffected feeling throughout society along the banks of a river like the Murray I would submit to almost any conceivable law. This is and always has been and always will be my view of the question. I expressed this view to the colonists on both sides of the Murray when I had the honour of visiting those districts during last year; and I am sure my honourable colleague will say that I did not lose any opportunity of enforcing those views upon the Government on my return to Sydney With regard to distant portions of these Australian colonies I am one of those who believe that where self-government can be carried out it is better that it should be carried out. [439] I am a colonist sufficiently old to remember the time when the country which is now the colony of Victoria was part of the colony of New South Wales. I took some interest in public life when the agitation was going on for the separation of this portion of the territory. I was in this city of Melbourne on the very day when the separation from New South Wales was celebrated and all my sympathies were with my fellow-colonists in this part of the territory. I thought it was only just to them and must necessarily be beneficial to the whole of the population that they should be separated from the old colony and erected into a separate community. Later still I was in the Legislature of the colony when the separation of Queensland took place and if anyone chooses to search the records of Parliament he will find that my vote was recorded for motions previously made in favour of the separation of that colony. I believe that persons considerable in numbers considerable in property and considerable in their industrial enterprises who are carrying on the work of colonisation at a remote distance of 600 or 700 miles from the seat of Government should be allowed as they attain to numerical strength sufficient for the purpose - and if other circumstances conform to such a condition of things - to form a colony of themselves. I have great sympathy for any class of my fellow-colonists who are placed under the disadvantages and difficulties which remoteness from the seat of Government will at all times carry with it. I should not like to be misunderstood or to be supposed even by implication to be the advocate for the creation of a new colony to be called Riverina. However earnest some gentlemen may be as Riverine patriots I am sure they will not be displeased with me for candidly declaring my own sentiments; and I do think that the colony of New South Wales within the boundaries fixed by the Constitution Act under which we now live has not yet been proved to be too large. I think before we split up any portion of this territory we should try better than we hitherto have done - and this I confess candidly - to govern these outlying districts satisfactorily and beneficially for the whole community. I think the Government in Sydney ought to devote all its energies without the loss of a single year to connecting the metropolis of the colony with those districts by railway. I am bound to acknowledge that one of the finest and 'noblest examples of statesmanship that I know of in the Australian colonies is the conception of the Victorian railway from Melbourne to Echuca and the vigorous action of the Government in carrying it out to completion. I don't know who were the authors of that scheme; but I think it was sagacious in conception and that it has been carried out with true patriotism; and I give the colony of Victoria every credit for its far-sightedness in this great work. But I should like to see the Government of New South Wales do something more than copy that example. [440] I should like to see the parent colony putting forth all her spirit of enterprise and constructing a railway to the Murrumbidgee with even double the energy of her ardent offspring. I should go further even than this. I should be disposed to devote all the revenue derived from those outlying districts in the interior to their improvement. I believe it is a sound principle to dedicate the revenue derived from the public lands of a new country to the improvement of that country and that the mere expenditure incurred in carrying on the civil government should be met by the ordinary means of taxation. The land once alienated can never be alienated again and the revenue derived from that source is collected once and for all. I think therefore it is a correct principle that the Governments of these new countries should devote the whole of this revenue to making the land more accessible for the purposes of settlement and civilisation. I held this doctrine years ago and I hold it still. At all times I shall be prepared to support the doctrine with reference to the outlying districts of the country. Our worthy chairman has alluded to the occasion which has brought my honourable colleague and myself to the city of Melbourne; and I am sure you possess that interest which intelligent men must feel in anything which draws the colonies into closer intercourse and into a better understanding. For my own part I do not hesitate to say that I regard this occasion - though I am in no sense the author of it - as one full of interest as one from which much may be expected and from which I believe many good results will undoubtedly flow. For the first time in the history of these Australian colonies they have all assembled including New Zealand - I may say all of them because they are all represented with the exception of Western Australia - with no feeling of emulation less worthy than the desire to have the largest share in effecting a common end to promote their common interests. It appears to me a very important occasion; and from my intercourse with the gentlemen who have been entrusted with this important mission I have formed so good an opinion of their judgment of their sound understanding and of their disinterested desire to promote the good of the entire group of colonies to lose sight of individual interests as far as they can be lost sight of consistently with a proper feeling of patriotism; that although I am restricted from saying anything about our proceedings I think I may venture to say that the results will not fail to be satisfactory to the Australian people and productive of great good to the Australian family. Apart from all personal interest I take in this occasion I think the time has arrived when these colonies should be united by some federal bond of connexion. I think it mu  We are here in a country endowed with enormous wealth with a large surface of rich territory which it is now our object and has been for years to distribute as justly as we can among the great bulk of the people who desire to settle upon that land at a price lower than its market value. [116] That is our desire. Now what is the difficulty with which any people or any Government having this object in view is immediately met? The difficulty is the competition of capital. In that struggle of capital against those who have no capital whom it is desired to endow with a portion of the advantages resulting from the public possession of the lands capital is always sure to gain the victory. If you enact legal provisions by which you direct every person who wants a piece of land worth £100 to get it by means of legal machinery for £50 and if the poor man in availing himself of this legal means of obtaining the land is exposed to the competition of the rich man who can doubt who will be successful? In such a competition the few will always overcome the many. Wealth will always outstrip poverty; and fraud will always outweigh simplicity. Surely experience has confirmed these observations which would arise a priori if we had no experience to guide us. Has not all our experience in land legislation in this country shown that unless there be an arbitrary power outside the courts of law - not dependent upon any legal machinery either for its existence or for the means of carrying out its decrees - those who are eager to obtain land and are willing to obtain it by unjust and fraudulent means if assisted and backed by capital will always succeed in getting it to the prevention of the poorer man who without capital seeks to obtain a share of this advantage? All our land legislation has failed so far as it has failed simply from this cause.  It is idle to say that land legislation can meet and defeat the various contrivances of fraud. Those contrivances are so numerous and the means of resisting them if absolute power be not given so weak that - I care not how carefully your Acts are framed - if men are tempted by strong inducements of avarice and are provided with legal means to effect their object the State will be defrauded and the poor man for whom you wish to legislate will be utterly defeated. Therefore I avow that while I regard these large powers i.e. for the Minister as an essential part of this Bill I am prepared to support the Bill because it contains these powers and I should not be prepared to support any Land Bill which did not contain them.  I believe that there are now close upon 20000 persons holding licences under the 42nd section the area of their land being about 486000 acres; and under the 12th section there' are 10000 or 12000 persons holding licences for 1425000 acres. All this settlement has taken place since the Land Act of 1865 came into operation. The value of the improvements made on the land taken up under the 12th section amounts to £1500000. I may also mention as showing the bona fides of the selectors that the revenue to be received from rentals (leases and licences) under the sections to which I have referred for the year 1868 was estimated by the present Government at £220000 and by the Sladen Government at £205000; but up to the present time the amount received is £227000 or £5000 in excess of our estimate [...]. [136]  We no longer hear of swagmen tramping from one end of the territory to the other - going from station to station and from place to place as mere idlers and loafers. They have now settled down having got little plots of ground from the Government. We do not now hear of so many wandering miners many of the mining population having settled down on the land. The settlement which has taken place on the gold-fields is something surprising. By the facilities which have been afforded for settlement of that character some of the best classes of colonists have been attached to our soil who would otherwise have been wanderers up and down upon the face of the earth. There are also many men - hundreds of them to my certain knowledge - who having made money in the colony in business and in various walks of life have invested their savings in these holdings who would otherwise most probably have taken themselves and their money out of the colony. These sir are the fruits of the legislation which we were enabled to effect by the assistance of the great Liberal party who now sit in this House who have supported us most disinterestedly most patriotically and with great sacrifice to themselves during the last three years. They have not only supported us in our various struggles to accomplish the settlement of the people on the land but they have supported us in the great constitutional struggles in which this House has been engaged. To them it must be a very pleasant reflection that by their assistance we have at all events been able to accomplish some good. We have not left this colony the worse for being intrusted with the administration of the land law and the general government of the country during the last six years. Our administration is not only bearing fruit now but I believe it will bear fruit when we are sleeping in the dust.  Will you shortly state what you consider the obstacles in the way of still further supplementing the resources of this district through selection? - It may be my own opinion only - it is that the selections are too small. It is a mistake to keep married women from being allowed to select; 320 acres is not enough for a married man - I think a man and his wife ought to be able to select. In the first place by encouraging single people to select and keeping those who get married from selecting it discourages marriage in the colony and keeps down the population and may cause the Government to say some day we want immigrants when here you have the bone and muscle of the colony.  Can you say that there is any decided increase in the production of grain in this district? - Yes; every year.  Do you remember the number of bushels of wheat raised here in the first year that you took the statistics? - I could not remember what it was.  Is there any record? - No; we are not allowed to keep a record and there is a penalty of £10 for making an extract.  Do you keep no records in the department? - No; I collect them and forward them to the Government and I am liable to a fine if I make any extracts.  I presume we can get the whole of the returns by applying to the Government for them? - Yes.  You remember at any rate that a great increase has taken place in wheat? - Yes.  Has the increase of production kept pace with the increase of selection? [147] - More so. Those who had 30 or 40 acres under crop the first year had 100 and 150 the second and third years.  Is the farming class prosperous and successful would you say? - I should say not - they have not had time.  And yet the production has enormously increased? - Yes  Can you explain that? - There have been several dry seasons and the number of bushels per acre has not been fairly remunerative - only 8 or 10 bushels to the acre this last season.  What was the average three years ago? - I cannot remember but it was better than that. I have cut 35 bushels of wheat to the acre here myself.  What is the wheat sold at here? - I cannot tell you.  What were the circumstances under which you obtained so good a return? - It was not exceptionally rich land it was a sand-hill.  It was a good wheat year I suppose? - Not extraordinarily.  I suppose you had enough rain - more than last year or the year before? - Yes.  You value the various holdings? - Yes.  You mentioned that you would like to see the holdings increased from 320 acres to 640 acres; in this district on the ordinary land can a man make a good living out of 320 acres? - A single man may starting with fair means but a married man with a family of small children it is a misery to him.  Are there many farms occupied by single men in this district? - A good few.  Can you give an idea of how many? - No.  Are they numerous? - I cannot say that. They are principally steady young men; but there are cases of men with a wife and small family who are deeply in debt.  Will it improve the position of the man in difficulty to have a larger farm to improve - would not that increase his difficulty? - Not supposing he had 640 acres to start off with. It does not take double the number of rods of fencing for 640 acres that it does to fence 320 and he can keep sheep enough to support him while he is making-improvements grubbing and so forth.  But there is the objection that if he takes 640 acres there will be less for others? - I cannot mention a case where a man who has a family of young children is doing well.  What do you mean by well? - Paying his way; keeping out of debt.  After so short a time with his improvements to make house and so on and commencing without capital it is unreasonable to expect him to be in good circumstances? - Yes quite so; but if he gets into debt he cannot get out again with 320 acres. He is deeper in debt every day. [148]  Have you had experience in any other district? - No. I have been here twenty-eight years.  Then you look forward not hopefully to the present settlement in this district owing to the small areas? - In the case of families of small children.  If they work themselves and all put their shoulder to the wheel 320 acres seems to be a sufficient holding? - With only one shoulder to the wheel it is hard work with so many mouths to feed.  If they are the right stamp they will get on. The idea of the State is not to make a wealthy man but a comfortable man? - Well I wish you were round with me sometimes.  You cannot do it all at once? - After three or four years and the man in debt to the full value of his selection he will never be comfortable. I know cases where with 640 acres they would have been able to pay their way.  Do they give that as the reason? - Yes some do.  Then suppose you make it 1280 acres would not that be better?  Yes; double it again that would be better still.  Has the increased production arisen from increased settlement or how? - In this way. In every selection taken up there is some wheat put down if not the first year the second year and then more the next year from 40 acres up to 100 and 150.  As a rule the selectors are cultivating more yearly? - Yes.  From your conversations with the selectors are you of opinion that there is a tendency to sell out after they secure their lease? - No generally not; they are as a rule anxious to make a home for themselves. There are a few exceptions.  You have said that the selectors are as a rule in difficulties that it is almost impossible for a man with a young family to succeed and that those who have fallen into financial difficulties cannot get out - how are they then to be retained on the land? - I think there is very little hope for a great many of them.  Have any of these people you spoke to told you they will have to sell out because they cannot pay their liabilities incurred in past years? - Yes.  Have they told you that they have been threatened that they will be sold out unless they pay their debts? - Yes.  If they had got money on better terms would that have been sufficient to keep them out of difficulty? - I think it would.  If instead of borrowing at 22 per cent. on their licences they were able to borrow from the State at something like 8 per cent. the difficulty would be easily overcome? - I believe so. There are many now who are deeply in debt who if they could get the money at 8 per cent. would still struggle through.  Have you heard many complaints made as to the high charges for money? - They say they have to pay pretty stiff for money and also for rations and food from the storekeepers. [149]  Is it a cash trade or a credit trade here? - It is all credit trade here.  Have you heard that because of the excessive charges- they will be ultimately driven from the land? - Yes.  I suppose the whole trade here is so entirely credit that any one coming here to open a cash business would not make it pay? - I think he might succeed in time.  Are not the customers secured by having them on the books?? - Yes; but there are some others.  Are not the prices owing to the credit system higher here than the working classes elsewhere have to pay? - Yes. I know for a fact that the storekeepers give a very long time and charge high in consequence.  And make a good profit? - Yes.  What is the difference between the charges here and in Geelong or Melbourne? - Fifty per cent higher here. Take a pair of moleskin trousers. In Stawell you can buy them for 5s. or 5s. 6d. a pair; here in Horsham they are 10s. and 11s.  You attribute that difference exclusively to the fact of the credit trade here? - Yes I must say in Stawell you have to pay cash.  Did you ever buy a pair of moleskin trousers yourself? - No; I speak only from hearsay.  I think you make a mistake about that - moleskin trousers could not be bought for that price anywhere? - It is only what I heard.  You think that the Government having provided the selectors with cheap land should also provide them with cheap money to keep them on the land? - The great majority start with nothing and go there as a last resource.  Would a reduction of the yearly rent to half the present amount - 1s. an acre instead of 2s. - be a substantial relief? - Not for those who are deeply in debt - £16 a year would do no good.  In fact these people you speak of are not redeemable? - Some of them are.   Are there many in that state? - Not a great many.  Fifty per cent to the storekeeper and 22.5 per cent. To the money lender - that would explain everything without the smallness of the holding? - Yes; but if the holding had been larger to start with they would not have required the accommodation.  I suppose the storekeepers are very rich men up here? - I do not think so; bad debts do not make rich men.  26. Will you explain how the sittings and business of the Supreme Court are regulated? They are regulated in reference to the state of the business of the court the terms the insolvency days the equity days and the circuits. [206]  27. Have the judges the sole power of regulating that business? Yes; that is inherent in every court. 1 may add though that by statute the Governor in Council has power to appoint the places where the assizes shall he held leaving the judges the power to name the times when they shall he held.  28. In reference to the appointing of times is the Bar or the legal profession generally consulted - is their convenience consulted? Their convenience is certainly consulted by the action of the judges; but they are not personally consulted. On one or two occasions when the arrangement was found to be inconvenient a representation was made to the judges and the following year the arrangement was altered. For instance we used to go up to Maryborough before we went to Rockhampton; and that was found to be rather inconvenient. There was a good deal of time to spare at Maryborough and very little at Rockhampton; and it was thought that the holiday would come best at the close of the circuit.  29. Are you aware Judge Lutwyche that complaints are made by the Bar and the other branch of the legal profession that their convenience is not sufficiently consulted? I am not aware of it.  30. What are the usual hours of sitting in your court or courts? In term time ten o'clock till four with an interval of adjournment - generally half-an-hour. At the sittings in assize from ten o'clock till any hour the presiding judge thinks proper to sit with the usual interval of adjournment of an hour for lunch. In insolvency from eleven o'clock to four generally; sometimes longer if the business requires it. If the business is very long or likely to be very long an adjournment takes place at four o'clock and the court sits the following day. On many occasions I have had to sit for upwards of a week together in insolvency.  31. Are those hours strictly kept? Well; pretty strictly kept. Yes. Sometimes especially in term time the Chief Justice and I have to confer before we go into court on some point that has arisen on the previous day or on some matters of practice; and as we see very little of one another except during term time that is a very convenient time to dispose of any points of law or matters of practice that may have arisen.  127. Do you think that the business of the Supreme Court is such that the time has arrived for the appointment of a third judge? No I do not. Whenever the judges find that they cannot do their work they will make application to the Executive for assistance.  128. Do you not think it would be more satisfactory to litigants that there should be a third judge sitting in cases of appeal or three judges? No; I do not as matters stand. Prima facie it may seem objectionable that one judge the Chief Justice - who after all is only primus inter pares - should have a double vote; but in practice the regulation has worked well. We have very rarely differed in opinion - very rarely indeed; and when we have differed - perhaps not half-a-dozen times in half-a-dozen years that we have sat together - it has been upon points of minor importance.  129. Are appeals against judgments in Queensland as frequent as in New South Wales? We have never had an appeal since the Supreme Court was instituted.  4. Do you consider yourself the father of the Bar here? Yes I am the oldest practitioner in this colony of longer standing at the Bar than anyone in this colony.  5. Have you reason to think Mr. Blake that the appointment of a third Judge of the Supreme Court would be of advantage to the colony? I think it would be a decided advantage. Indeed I think that for the administration of justice and the proper administration of the law it is essential. I can give you my reasons.  6. Will you state your reasons if you please why you have come to that conclusion? Because in the first place there is no tribunal composed of two judges [as the Queensland Supreme Court then was] even if they were men of considerable ability and legal knowledge that is not an imperfect tribunal. There is a great difficulty in two men constantly sitting together coming to an independent conclusion; they generally try if they differ in opinion - they must constantly try - to accommodate matters between them each giving up a portion. Whereas if there are three each forms a distinct and an independent opinion and the majority decides: in fact when I say three it is an odd number. In England and Ireland the feeling of the profession is opposed to two judges though there are two in the Courts of Lords Justices of Appeal in Chancery; but they are not open to the same objection because they are strictly Courts of Appeal; and there is a judge of the court below - there is the opinion of the judge below - so there are in effect three; if they differ one must coincide with the judge of the court below. But I find that even there they are objected to. In the recent report of the Commission - published the other day to investigate the law system in England I find that one of the recommendations is that no court consisting of more than one judge should consist of less than three. That commission has the ablest men in England on it.  7. Are you not aware that the Chief Justice has the power of giving the casting vote? I am. I think that a very injudicious power - I believe that it is. I do not know of its ever having been exercised. I think the present Chief Justice is about the last man in the world to exercise it.  8. Then truly if they differ now one has to accommodate himself to the other? That is the course. From my experience that is what is done.  9. Can you give any other reason? I can give you a remarkable instance of that which occurred recently; in the case that was tried at Rockhampton McGavin and Mac Master. In that case the Chief Justice ruled upon a very nice legal question wrongly according to my opinion; and the verdict of the jury was clearly against the weight of evidence; and the matter was brought before the court for a new trial. Mr. Justice Lutwyche appeared to be of a different opinion from the Chief Justice; and ultimately they decided the case in the singular way that they affirmed the ruling of the Chief Justice but granted a new trial because the verdict was against evidence; and they made the plaintiff pay the costs of the former trial or directed him to pay the costs of the former trial; but the plaintiff from his inability to pay those costs has been unable to proceed any further. Now if there had been three judges the record of that case would have been entirely different in my opinion.  10. Do you think the public is inconvenienced seriously by delays consequent upon there not being a third judge? I do. I think the unsatisfactory way in which the law business is done must be very prejudicial to the country - - must be very injurious; in fact I know people suffer a great deal from it. [208]  11. Do you find at times that cases in which you are interested are seriously retarded for want of your being able to obtain the attention of a judge? I cannot say they are retarded in consequence of there not being a third judge. I think that they would be much more satisfactorily determined if there were a third judge. I think they are more retarded from the way in which the business of the court is managed.  12. Will you explain further what you mean by the business being retarded? - In consequence of the way in which the rules are managed? Well the principal objection is this: the business of the year is compressed into small periods and then there are large intervals when in fact there is nothing doing.  13. Those intervals are called vacations? No: there are only strictly two vacations in the year. I have got the paper of the court before me which I shall call your attention to: - the Christmas vacation commenced on Saturday the 19th of December 1868 and ended on Saturday 13th February 1869. Winter vacation commenced on Saturday 5th June; ended on Saturday 10th July 1869. These are the vacations strictly so called. I think the winter vacations unnecessarily and needlessly long. I do not think the summer is for it is essential to everybody: it is not so long as in England - it is two months summer vacation. It is essential for the people in this country to enable them to get a rest after the year's work; - a shorter vacation than that would not allow the members of the profession to take some recreation which they all do. At that hot season of the year I do not think that is too long. The winter vacation is. But it will be necessary to look over -   14. May I ask you one question before you go further? - Do you think it is absolutely necessary that there should be vacations? Oh! yes; I think so. I think there should be a summer vacation of not less than six weeks. During that time of course one judge would - as they do in New South Wales as everywhere - attend to whatever business might arise. Of course if there were three judges the other two - as in New South Wales or as in England all but one - can go anywhere they please. One judge always remains at home - they take it alternately - to transact whatever business may arise during that time.  15. You were continuing your statement when I interrupted you? I was saying that the business is compressed into too short periods of time to allow it to be got through. There are four sittings in Brisbane for the trial of causes in the year for each of which the judges allow only a week and the week before term; so that there is no opportunity given to extend the sittings if necessary.  16. And if the business is not done during that week what is the result? Such as what has taken place recently on three or four occasions; - that the business has to be postponed and heard at such intervals of time as can be obtained from other business.  17. Do those postponements add to the expenses of the litigants? Enormously. The principal expense is witnesses - retaining witnesses who have on many occasions to be kept during all this time and other expenses; of course every expense is increased by it but the great expense is in witnesses.  [...] in consequence of the proximity of the United States and Canada to Europe a large stream of population must flow and is continually flowing to those countries hose who were rich enough might come but others must stop away. If Australia were as accessible from England as the United States and Canada these regulations would be superfluous. The regulations are only required to adjust the difference between the countries. A passage from England to the United States or Canada can be obtained for £3 or £4 but to come to this country costs £15 or £16. Under these circumstances does the honorable and learned member suppose that for 100 persons who go to the United States and Canada one will come here? The honorable and learned member cannot escape the conclusion that this is the cause why we receive such a small number of immigrants while thousands are pouring into the United States. Is this country to remain perpetually without any addition to the population - without any new blood? If the country is to advance if we are to grow up a community worthy of being called a nation and able to keep up armaments and hold our own against other nations it is absolutely necessary that we should have an increase of our population from without as well as from within. The honorable and learned member for Brighton [i.e. Mr Higinbotham] may make war against Rogers [i.e. the permanent UnderSecretary of State for the Colonies] or any other obnoxious character on the other side of the world; but it is ridiculous for us to take up high ground and assume a warlike attitude while we have a population contemptible in numbers as compared with the powers we assume. In all the large movements of nations power and strength lie like other things in population; and in proportion to a nation's population is its respectability power and influence among the other communities of the world ("No.") I say "Yes." [247] All things being equal population is a large and most material element of power and respectability in any nation; and it is because I desire by every legitimate means to advance the respectability power influence and prosperity of this country that I certainly feel the necessity - whatever may be the personal consequences to myself - of supporting resolutely the immigration regulations which we have had the honour to submit.  [...] in the Times newspaper some short time ago a paragraph put forward this view very forcibly. It said [...]  That is exceedingly candid; and viewed in the light of the language employed by several English public men is I am sure a perfectly truthful representation of the feeling which influences public men in suggesting an increase of emigration from England. Now is it our duty to assist English politicians in exporting this class which is the only class they wish to export? ("No.") I am glad we are now making some progress towards agreement.  I am speaking of a class which in consequence of poverty and the physical and intellectual weakness which poverty in the long run brings upon the individual are unable to meet their fellow citizens on equal terms in the battle of life and who therefore are pushed to the wall. These are the persons I speak of and in reference to them I am free to admit that they are not the best or indeed a good element in forming the population of a new country. But how will you prevent England from exporting her paupers? You have never been able to prevent it under the' regulations hitherto framed. The parson has always been able to get rid of the poor "shiftless" incapable parishioner.  I have long thought over that question and I have been utterly unable - unassisted as I have been by any discussion in Parliament or in the press - to see any national or public advantage that is derived from an artificial system of immigration by State money. I don't know whether the view be one which may not be censured by the honorable member for West Melbourne (Mr. Langton); but I would be glad if he would explain to me how it is that an artificial system of this kind can be consistent with those principles of freedom of trade which he professes and which I for one believe in and practically approve of. [248] I have always believed that the material prosperity of a country - and it is only the material prosperity of a country that is affected by immigration - depends not upon the actual numbers of the population but upon the proportion that exists between the labouring population and capital and the proportion borne to both of them by the natural resources and riches of the country. If this country is able to maintain in material comfort and prosperity five millions of people I suppose that that population will not necessarily be more prosperous than a population of five thousand. It may be more prosperous it may be less but its prosperity will not be affected by the actual numbers of the population. It will be affected by the proportion between population and capital and the proportion of both to the natural riches of the soil. If that be so I want to know why we should endeavour - with a view to national public interests - artificially to increase the population of the country? Our population is increasing by natural growth - by the growth which Providence decrees to all countries. It is suggested to me that it increases in an improvident manner. Certainly it increases with alarming rapidity. But having pointed out the natural means by which population will grow I ask why we should adopt an artificial means? What is the national or public interest which induces us to aid the natural means by this artificial process of increasing the population? I have never heard an answer to that question. I cannot conceive an answer.  REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERCOLONIAL CONFERENCE ASSEMBLED IN MELBOURNE IN THE MONTHS OF JUNE AND JULY 1870.  This Conference was convened at the instance of the Government of Tasmania primarily in order to consider the desirability of the establishment of a Customs Union for the Australasian Colonies and the removal of all restrictions upon intercolonial trade. [287] The invitation was responded to by the colonies of New South Wales Victoria and South Australia whose representatives with those of Tasmania were as follows:   PRESENT: [...]  The Government of Victoria having placed the Executive Council Chamber at the disposal of the Conference its first meeting was held there on 20th June at noon; the sittings being continued until 5th July.  The most important questions considered by the Conference were a free interchange of the natural productions and manufactures of the respective colonies a uniform Tariff with assimilated excise regulations a Customs Union and a distribution of the revenue derived therefrom upon the basis of population. The desirableness of such arrangements was admitted and the more important items subject to fixed duties were considered and might have been agreed to; but upon approaching the list of articles involving free trade on the one hand and discriminating duties on the other various difficulties presented themselves and it was found impracticable to effect such a compromise as would secure the desired result. These difficulties precluded New South Wales from accepting the principle upon which the proposal of Victoria was based; and the representatives of the latter colony considering the prospective advantages thereby diminished subsequently proposed new conditions for South Australia and Tasmania to which these colonies were unable to accede.  But although for the reasons stated the Conference has not arrived at any definite conclusion on the subject the consideration of the question has led to a deeper conviction of its importance; whilst the resolution to memorialize Her Majesty's Government to remove the prohibitions against intercolonial free trade interposed by imperial enactment will if successful materially facilitate further action. [288]  That a plan for harmonizing the diverse tariffs of the Australasian colonies so as to secure the assent of various political parties should be a work not easy of attainment is only what might have been expected; but the Conference impressed with the excellence of the object has faith in its ultimate and not far distant success.  The Conference however has been in perfect accord upon several other questions of considerable importance. It has been decided to recommend the adoption by the various Governments represented of a uniform sea-going intercolonial postage rate of threepence and also to reduce the charges upon telegraphic messages. It is believed that these arrangements will be found beneficial to trade and acceptable to the public generally.  The evils that have arisen from the facility with which absconding debtors and other offenders have been enabled to evade justice through the absence of uniform intercolonial law on the subject formed part of the deliberations of the Conference and it was resolved that the Governments of the various colonies should be urged to introduce Bills of similar import at the earliest practicable opportunity.  The question of immigration was considered and an opinion was recorded that it would be desirable in future to adopt a plan common to the several colonies so as to secure to each the full benefit to which it would be entitled on account of the expenditure of public money for this object. The attention of the several Governments will be invited to the question with a view to the adoption of corresponding regulations.  Despatches from the Imperial Government having intimated the intended withdrawal of the troops now stationed in Australia the Conference took into consideration the course to be pursued under the altered circumstances in which the colonies are about to be placed and it was decided to press upon the attention of Her Majesty's Government the paramount duty of their making adequate naval provision for the protection of British and Australian commerce in these waters especially in time of war.  Resolutions were also agreed to on the following subjects: - The adoption of the necessary steps to secure the withdrawal of the large amount of worn and deteriorated silver coinage now circulating in the Australian colonies:  For obtaining the establishment of a British Protectorate over the Fiji Islands:  For the calling of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's steamers at the port of Kangaroo Island in South Australia:  Telegraphic communication with Port Darwin and with the Gulf of Carpentaria: [289]  The proposed new schemes of Ocean Postal and Passenger service:  The relief of distressed colonists and seamen in foreign ports:  The statistical records of the several colonies being corn piled upon a uniform method:  And the Conference also affirmed the desirableness of the respective Governments exerting their influence with a view to the introduction of the Central system for weights.  The first question was brought forward by the Tasmanian representatives - that of the Customs Union They wanted a uniform tariff that the same duties should be levied on the same articles and that there should be the same free list in all the colonies and that all the moneys collected under this uniform tariff should go into one common fund and be divided rateably according to the population of the different colonies They also desired that there should be a uniform system of internal excise which of course would have a great deal to do with the collection at the Custom-House; and they also proposed that there should be a free interchange between the colonies of any articles produced in either of the colonies so united. The delegates from Tasmania entered on the subject with great ability having devoted a long time to its consideration; but the first thing which prevented a Customs Union being carried out was the exceedingly different position between New South Wales and Victoria. [290] New South Wales went in strongly for free trade; Victoria was at all events moderate protectionist and would not consent to give up the amount of protection which they considered their tariff afforded to local industries and were prepared to maintain the ad valorem duties or an equivalent and their discriminating duties. The New South Wales delegates on the other hand avowed their intention of abolishing the ad valorem duties as soon as they possibly could and trust to a few items of fixed duties for a Customs revenue. Both parties being immovable the co-operation of the two leading colonies was out of the question. The next step was to consider whether South Australia might not benefit herself by uniting with Victoria and Tasmania leaving New South Wales for the present out of the question; for although this colony was not so Protectionist as Victoria it would be absurd to deny that the exigencies of their finances would oblige them to raise a little more from the Custom-House somehow or other. (The Hon. T. English - "Hear hear.") But when the idea was mooted the Victorian delegates were no longer willing to meet South Australia and Tasmania on the same terms as they were willing to accept when New South Wales was supposed to be a consenting party but made an entirely different and most obnoxious proposition that South Australia and Tasmania should be bound down for a term of years to maintain unaltered a certain tariff which Victoria reserved to herself the right to modify from time to time as she thought fit. (A laugh.) The South Australian and Tasmanian delegates at once said that they could not agree to recommend that to their different Governments and prepared a minute setting forth the reasons why the two colonies could not agree to that proposition. He could rely with confidence that every member of the Council would support the view taken by the South Australian representatives in the matter. (Cheers.) It was utterly impossible to hand over this colony to be legislated for by Victoria and have no power to modify her tariff for herself. So far the Customs Union project had failed but it would be seen from no fault of the representatives of this colony or those of Tasmania. Another point was then brought forward by the Tasmanian delegates that of facilitating the introduction of colonial produce horn one colony to another; but here they were met by this difficulty - the Imperial Parliament had already disallowed an Act passed by the Tasmanian Legislature authorizing this kind of interchange refusing to allow articles to be admitted free from the colonies when similar articles from beyond the seas had to pay duty. The whole of the delegates united however in agreeing as to the desirability of the free interchange of colonial products notwithstanding any duties levied on corresponding articles from abroad; and all agreed that their various Governments should frame a Bill for presentation to the Home Government asking that it might be passed through the House of Commons authorizing the colonies notwithstanding any present law to the contrary to make arrangements amongst themselves for the interchange of their local products and manufactures. [291] It remained to be seen whether they should succeed; but it was to be hoped seeing the united feeling which existed on this point that the Imperial Government would remove this veto out of their way; and if they did so there would be one element of good resulting from the Conference and there would be no difficulty in the disposal of their wine and wheat or any other article they could produce. This would be no mean instalment of intercolonial free trade.  And if any time within this generation war should come between two of the great states - a war in which England and France or England and America are on different sides - consider what our position will then be? Our ships will perhaps no longer be able to carry our gold and wool to Europe; and gold and wool will fall as cotton did in the Confederate States of America during the blockade to a nominal price. [449] They will no longer be able to bring us our ordinary supplies from Yorkshire Birmingham China or the Mauritius; and some of the prime necessities of civilization will either be unattainable or will reach a famine price. It may be said no doubt that England is mistress of the seas and will be able to protect her commerce and ours. But France and America have been making enormous expenditure and immense exertions for years past to be in a position to compete for this supremacy. Even if it be admitted that England would be able to protect the great highway to Europe by the Cape will she be able to guard the Northern Pacific or to save the great Australian cities from fleets stationed at San Francisco or New Caledonia? We have read - many of us at all events - reports upon the defence of this country which lay down in the most dogmatic terms the exact course that an invading enemy would take - where he would land and where he would by no possibility land; but for my part I have very slight faith in dogmatisms of this nature. I believe with the French wit that the only thing we can count upon with tolerable certainty to happen is what nobody foresaw. If a French Lord Dundonald or an American Paul Jones made his appearance on our coast he would put all these pedantic theories to flight by doing the exact thing which it was foretold would never happen. As most of the members of this House have become members of it since the federal question was last under consideration I will state very briefly what has been hitherto done in relation to it. In the first session of the first Parliament of Victoria - fourteen years ago - a committee was appointed on my motion to report whether the federation of the colonies was desirable and if desirable how it could be brought about. Many of the members of that committee are here no longer. Some of them are in Europe some of them are members of the other House several of them are dead. Only three remain but happily of these three one is the present Chief Secretary and the other is the present Attorney-General. [...] The report of that select committee was submitted to this House in November 1857 and adopted by it. It was shortly afterwards submitted to the Legislative Council and adopted by it; and both Houses arrived at resolutions to the effect that such a conference should be held and that it should consist of three members - two from the Assembly and one from the Council - of each Legislature in the Australian colonies. The proposal was communicated to the neighbouring colonies and was received with the greatest favour. In South Australia both Houses of the Legislature accepted and affirmed our proposal and proceeded to select delegates to attend at Melbourne which was agreed to be the place of conference. They selected as their delegates the then Chief Secretary now Sir Richard Hanson Chief Justice of the colony and Mr. Torrens then leader of the Opposition and now one of the representatives of Cambridge in the House of Commons. [450]   In Tasmania the subject was taken up with equal promptness and favour; both Houses passed resolutions assenting to the proposal and also proceeded to appoint delegates to represent them at the conference. Queensland had not then come into existence as an independent colony but it did shortly after-wards when communications having been opened with the Chief Secretary that gentleman wrote a letter stating that when the conference was held Queensland would gladly co-operate with the other colonies. Then with respect to New South Wales - which may he called the mother colony - the Legislative Council of that colony appointed a select committee consisting of the most eminent men in the House - including Sir Alfred Stephen Sir William Burton and Mr. Deas Thomson - who made a most careful inquiry into the subject and concluded by recommending the Parliament of New South Wales to accept the proposal made by Victoria. Thus the proposal received assent from every legislative body in Australia except the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales; and there the matter had proceeded so far as to be on the business paper when a political crisis occurred a change of Government took place Mr. Cowper came into office and he signalized his assumption of power by declaring against what had been universally accepted insisting that the time was not ripe for such a proceeding and stating that he was not prepared to take any part in appointing delegates. A general election took place shortly afterwards and Mr. Cowper was strong enough in the new Parliament to prevent any action being taken at that time. It then became a question with the Victorian committee what should be done under the circumstances whether conference should be held of such delegates as would come or whether we should wait and endeavour to get New South Wales to act with us. In order to make sure of what seemed highly probable correspondence was opened with several eminent men in New South Wales I communicated with Sir James Martin Mr Forster Mr. Robertson Mr. Parkes Dr. Lang Mr. Dailey and other leading men and found that all with one single exception were favourable to federation. Under those circumstances it was thought that the time was not very distant when the co-operation of New South Wales would be obtained and it was agreed not to hold any conference until her assent was procured. The friends of federation -in the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales at last obtained the appointment of a select committee which deliberated on the question at some length but never made any report. The committee of this House was revived in 1860 and again in 1862 but never -succeeded in getting the assent of New South Wales. So the matter rested. In fact there was no manifest urgency for pushing it forward. [451]  It waited for circumstances to give it importance. Those circumstances I think have come; and if we take up this question anew I trust it will be with the resolute determination of carrying it through with whatever assistance we can get without waiting for a preliminary unanimity. [...] Now sir I have barely glanced at the intercolonial effects of the creation of a federation. In the first place it would put an end to what a Canadian statesman describes as "colonies cutting each others throats with razors called tariffs." It would create between us an intercourse of mind. At present we scarcely know what is happening beyond our own borders; we know most imperfectly who are the men of intellect and action bond Cape Howe and the Murray. It would result in the creation of a national spirit - that spirit which has inspired some of the greatest actions in history. And finally it would give Australia complete control of her own resources for the protection of her own interests. I am persuaded that gold has not lost any of its old attractions the greed with which the buccaneer of olden days longed for one of the South American settlements or for a ship from Mexico loaded with ingots is something like the longing which would possess a French or a Yankee privateer to overhaul an Australian clipper on her homeward voyage or make acquaintance with the ill-defended capital of a gold country. If federation involves us in some trouble or cost one month of a war for which we were ill-prepared would cost us more. Therefore on one point I hope there will be absolute unanimity - that if the country is compelled to resist foreign agression we shall have available for the purpose the whole force of Australia.  SCENE VII. - "TWO EXHORTATIONS."  A Shooting-box in the West of Ireland. A Bedchamber. LAURENCE RABY and MELCHIOR. Night.   Melchior: Surely in the great beginning God made all things good and still  That soul-sickness men call sinning entered not without His will.  [155] Nay our wisest have asserted that as shade enhances light  Evil is but good perverted wrong is but the foil of right.  Banish sickness then you banish joy for health to all that live;  Slay all sin all good must vanish good being but comparative.  Sophistry you say - yet listen: look you skyward there 'tis known  Worlds on worlds in myriads glisten - larger lovelier than our own -  This has been and this still shall be here as there in sun or star;  These things are to be and will be those things were to be and are.  Man in man's imperfect nature is by imperfection taught:  Add one cubit to your stature if you can by taking thought.  Laurence: Thus you would not teach that peasant though he calls you "father".  Melchior: True  I should magnify this present mystify that future too -  We adapt our conversation always to our hearer's light.  Laurence: I am not of your persuasion.  Melchior: Yet the difference is but slight.  [156] Laurence: I even I say "He who barters worldly weal for heavenly worth  He does well" - your saints and martyrs were examples here on earth.  Melchior: Aye in earlier Christian ages while the heathen empire stood  When the war 'twixt saints and sages cried aloud for saintly blood  Christ was then their model truly. Now if all were meek and pure  Save the ungodly and the unruly would the Christian Church endure?  Shall the toiler or the fighter dream by day and watch by night  Turn the left cheek to the smiter smitten rudely on the right?  Strong men must encounter bad men - so-called saints of latter days  Have been mostly pious madmen lusting after righteous praise -  Or the thralls of superstition doubtless worthy some reward  Since they came by their condition hardly of their free accord.  'Tis but madness sad and solemn that these fakir-Christians feel -  Saint Stylites on his column gratified a morbid zeal.  Laurence: By your showing good is really on a par (of worth) with ill.  [157] Melchior: Nay I said not so; I merely tell you both some ends fulfil -  Priestly vows were my vocation fast and vigil wait for me.  You must work and face temptation. Never should the strong man flee  Though God wills the inclination with the soul at war to be. (Pauses.)  In the strife 'twixt flesh and spirit while you can the spirit aid.  Should you fall not less your merit be not for a fall afraid.  Whatsoe'er most right most fit is you shall do. When all is done  Chaunt the noble Nunc Dimittis - Benedicimur my son.  (Exit MELCHIOR.)   Laurence: (alone) Why do I provoke these wrangles? Melchior talks (as well he may)  With the tongues of men and angels.  (Takes up a pamphlet.) What has this man got to say?  (Reads.) Sic sacerdos fatur (ejus nomen quondam erat Burgo.)  Mala mens est caro pejus anima infirma ergo  I nunc ora sine mora - orat etiam Sancta Virgo.  (Thinks.)   (Speaks.) So it seems they mean to make her wed the usurer Nathan Lee.  Poor Estelle! her friends forsake her; what has this to do with me?  [158] Glad I am at least that Helen still refuses to discard  Her through tales false gossips tell  in spite or heedlessness. - 'Tis hard! -  Lee the Levite! - some few years back Herbert horsewhipp'd him - the cur  Show'd his teeth and laid his ears back. Now his wealth has purchased her.  Must his baseness mar her brightness? Shall the callous cunning churl  Revel in the rosy whiteness of that golden-headed girl?  (Thinks and smokes.) (Reads.)   Cito certe venit vitae finis (sic sacerdos fatur)  Nunc audite omnes ite vobis fabula narratur  Nunc orate et laudate laudat etiam Alma Mater.  (Muses.) Such has been and such shall still be  here as there in sun or star;  These things are to be and will be those things were to be and are.  If I thought that speech worth heeding I should - Nay it seems to me  More like Satan's special pleading than like Gloria Domine.  (Lies down on his couch.)  (Reads.) Et tuquoque frater meus facta mala quod fecisti  Denique confundit Deus omnes res quas tetegisti.  Nunc si unquam nunc aut nunquam sanguine adjuro Christi.    [159]  SCENE IX. - IN THE GARDEN.  Aylmer's Garden near the Lake. LAURENCE RABY and ESTELLE.   He: Come to the bank where the boat is moor'd to the willow-tree low;  Bertha the baby won't notice Brian the blockhead won't know.  She: Bertha is not such a baby sir as you seem to suppose;  Brian a blockhead he may be more than you think for he knows.  He: This much at least of your brother from the beginning he knew  Somewhat concerning that other made such a fool of by you.  She: Firmer those bonds were and faster Frank was my spaniel my slave.  You! you would fain be my master; mark you! the difference is grave.  He: Call me your spaniel your starling take me and treat me as these  I would be anything darling! aye whatsoever you please.  Brian and Basil are "punting" leave them their dice and their wine  Bertha is butterfly hunting surely one hour shall be mine.  [160] See I have done with all duty; see I can dare all disgrace  Only to look at your beauty feasting my eyes on your face.  She: Look at me aye till your eyes ache! How let me ask will it end?  Neither for your sake nor my sake but for the sake of my friend?  He: Is she your friend then? I own it this is all wrong and the rest  Frustra sed anima monet caro quod fortius est.  She: Not quite so close Laurence Raby not with your arm round my waist;  Something to look at I may be nothing to touch or to taste.  He: Wilful as ever and wayward; why did you tempt me Estelle?  She: You misinterpret each stray word you for each inch take an ell.  Lightly all laws and ties trammel me I am warn'd for all that.  He: (aside) Perhaps she will swallow her camel when she has strained at her gnat.  She: Therefore take thought and consider weigh well as I do the whole  You for mere beauty a bidder say would you barter a soul?  [161] He: Girl! that may happen but this is; after this welcome the worst;  Blest for one hour by your kisses let me be evermore curs'd.  Talk not of ties to me reckless here every tie I discard -  Make me your girdle your necklace -  She: Laurence you kiss me too hard.  He: Aye 'tis the road to Avernus n'est ce pas vrai donc ma belle?  There let them bind us or burn us mais le jeu vaut la chandelle.  Am I your lord or your vassal? Are you my sun or my torch?  You when I look at you dazzle yet when I touch you you scorch.  She: Yonder are Brian and Basil watching us fools from the porch.    SCENE X. - "AFTER THE QUARREL."  Laurence Raby's Chamber. LAURENCE enters a little the worse for liquor.   Laurence: He never gave me a chance to speak  And he call'd her - worse than a dog -  The girl stood up with a crimson cheek  And I fell'd him there like a log.  [162] I can feel the blow on my knuckles yet -  He feels it more on his brow.  In a thousand years we shall all forget  The things that trouble us now.    SCENE XI. - "TEN PACES OFF."  An open country. LAURENCE RABY and FORREST BRIAN AYLMER and PRESCOT.   Forrest: I've won the two tosses from Prescot;  Now hear me and hearken and heed  And pull that vile flower from your waistcoat  And throw down that beast of a weed;  I'm going to give you the signal  I gave Harry Hunt at Boulogne  The morning he met Major Bignell  And shot him as dead as a stone;  For he must look round on his right hand  To watch the white flutter - that stops  His aim for it takes off his sight and  I cough while the handkerchief drops.  And you keep both eyes on his figure  Old fellow and don't take them off.  You've got the sawhandled hair trigger -  You sight him and shoot when I cough.  Laurence:(aside) Though God will never forgive me  Though men make light of my name  Though my sin and my shame outlive me  I shall not outlast my shame.  The coward does he mean to miss me?  His right hand shakes like a leaf;  Shall I live for my friends to hiss me  Of fools and of knaves the chief?  [163] Shall I live for my foes to twit me?  He has master'd his nerve again -  He is firm he will surely hit me -  Will he reach the heart or the brain?  One long look eastward and northward -  One prayer - "Our Father which art" -  And the cough chimes in with the fourth word  And I shoot skyward - the heart.  LAST SCENE. - "EXEUNT."    HELEN RABY.   Where the grave-deeps rot where the grave-dews rust  They dug crying "Earth to earth" -  Crying "Ashes to ashes and dust to dust" -  And what are my poor prayers worth?  Upon whom shall I call or in whom shall I trust  Though death were indeed new birth.  And they bid me be glad for my baby's sake  That she suffered sinless and young -  Would they have me be glad when my breasts still ache  Where that small soft sweet mouth clung?  I am glad that the heart will so surely break  That has been so bitterly wrung.  He was false they tell me and what if he were?  I can only shudder and pray  [164] Pouring out my soul in a passionate prayer  For the soul that he cast away;  Was there nothing that once was created fair  In the potter's perishing clay?  Is it well for the sinner that souls endure?  For the sinless soul is it well?  Does the pure child lisp to the angels pure?  And where does the strong man dwell  If the sad assurance of priests be sure  Or the tale that our preachers tell?  The unclean has follow'd the undefiled  And the ill may regain the good  And the man may be even as the little child!  We are children lost in the wood -  Lord! lead us out of this tangled wild  Where the wise and the prudent have been beguil'd  And only the babes have stood.  I will trouble the House as shortly as I can with some explanation of the general principles upon which the measure is based of the mode in which while carrying out those principles we have endeavoured to act fairly with the existing system of education and with those who are interested under it and last but not least of the machinery we propose for the purpose of giving practical effect to the objects of the Bill. [711] As to the general principles I need not say much. They are comprised under the three general heads which were announced on the hustings by the Chief Secretary and other members of the Cabinet. They have now as far as I can judge been very generally accepted by the people of the country. There may be differences of opinion as to the mode in and extent to which those principles should be carried out; but it appears to me as far as I can judge that a large majority of the country and of the representatives of the people in this house including some members of the late Government are in favour of those three cardinal points namely secular compulsory and free education. There is nothing new in these proposals because since the Cabinet was formed we have been pledged to the country to bring in a measure based upon these three principles. Perhaps there is a more universal feeling in favour of secular education than of either-of the other two points. The feeling is almost as general in favour of compulsory education. But as far as I can judge from conversations which I have had with educated men some of them intimate friends of my own who take the same view as the Government with regard to secular and compulsory education there is some doubt felt as to the third element-free education - about which undoubtedly there is more novelty than in either of the other two proposals. I have thought over the subject for a long time with great interest and the more I learn and the more I consider this matter and the relation of the position of this colony towards it the more enamoured I am of the principle of free education; and I regret that it cannot be carried out to the fullest extent. However I will not anticipate the details on this point. First then as to secular education I think it is a necessity in this country and it is a settled question; I do not think it requires any argument nor do I think it requires illustration by the practice of other countries. It will probably be said that in many of the old countries from which we must draw our example secular education does not prevail. In the great example of Prussia for instance religious instruction forms part of the State system of education; and so with regard to other countries in Europe. This can be done in those countries for the simple reason that religion is part of the State; and as the State there can control religion it can control the schools even though religion is taught in them. It does not at all follow that because I and others advocate secular education therefore we undervalue religion. I have said this before and it is right to say so again whenever called upon to express our opinions on the subject. The principle of the existing Act properly carried out is secular education. I believe myself that as far as sectarian teaching has been introduced into the schools it has been done in violation or at all events evasion of the Act. [712] It is not necessary for the teaching of religion that it should be taught in the schools. Religion can be better taught by other persons than by the schoolmasters; and every truly religious person feels it to be his or her duty to assist or promote in Some way the teaching of religion. It will be taught where the community is truly religious and it will not be taught by any machinery of the State in a community which is not truly religious. I fully concur with the principle that the State has nothing to do with the teaching of religion. But whether that is a right principle or not it has been adopted by the State - it is part of our law. So far am I from thinking it desirable that the State should undertake the teaching of religion if it could do so and if we all belonged to one particular form of religious belief that I say speaking with a deeply religious feeling it is undesirable that religion should be taught by the schoolmaster. One necessary consequence of such a system is that religion is made unpleasant to the pupils. No child has ever a pleasing recollection of any so-called religion taught to him at school. A still greater evil of the system is that it satisfies the consciences of those whose duty it is to teach religion. In many churches in England it used to be the practice when I was at home and it may still be so in some churches there to have a parish clerk to make the responses for the congregation and the congregation left it to the clerk to take their part in the service. So if people can only shelter themselves and their consciences under the excuse that a schoolmaster is paid to teach their children religion they will not trouble themselves about teaching it at all. And not only will the people at large not do so but clergymen whose primary public duty it is to teach religion will neglect to do so. If it were a question of whether in the establishment of a new colony we should or should not have a State religion and whether the State should become responsible for the teaching of religion I should say "No". I don't say I should have said so when first I came to Victoria but enlightened as I trust I now am and having come in contact with a number of persons holding religious faiths almost identical in character and differing mainly in outward forms I should vote against the State teaching religion. The next point is that of compulsory education. I do not altogether like the word but I regard compulsory provisions as a necessity in order to secure the sending of children of certain classes to school. The law as we are told upon high authority is only "a terror to evil-doer's".   If there were no evil-doers it would not be necessary to have any laws. I may state broadly that compulsory education as a rule only answers where the people themselves accept it as the right thing. If compulsory education is the law of a country it will stand in the same position as other laws. If the people do not accept it as a law they believe in it will probably fail. In Scotland and in America where the people themselves are thoroughly imbued with the desire to have their children educated such a law is not wanted. [713] I quite admit that as a general principle. [...] In this country the question is - Why must education be compulsory? In making education compulsory while I trust that the measure may continue law I also hope that before many years are over it will be in point of fact a law entirely or substantially in abeyance. I regard it as a means necessary to introduce at the present time in order to teach parents by a moderate pressure - by a moderate dose of compulsion - to do that which when they have done it they will find to their own advantage. It is sometimes said that a large proportion of the children of this colony do attend school and that therefore a compulsory law is not needed here. It is said that nearly as large a proportion of the children attend school in this colony as in England and in various favorable countries on the continent. I am not sure that it is not so. I believe that our statistics are tolerably reliable and they show that about one in eleven of the whole population attends school which is a very fair proportion. I believe that we have a very efficient staff of school inspectors an able body of teachers and good -machinery. Every credit is due to men who under many disadvantages have worked well in order to induce the people of this country to send their children to school. The result has not been unsuccessful but I think that in a country like this we ought not to be content as long as any children do not attend school. We have two classes of children absent from school who ought especially to be considered. The first class consists of those waifs and strays found in all large cities. I do not know whether that class is worse here than in other countries. Probably it is not; but the class is one whose condition everyone must be desirous of improving. The second evil with which we have to cope is one peculiarly our own. We have been for years following a policy of spreading the people over the lands; and no one will deny that some of our best immigrants forming one of the most valuable portions of our population are placed out upon the lands in remote districts. We have sent them out into all corners of the country and it is our plain duty to follow them with schools. Many of these persons were in a superior condition of life at home - farmers who came out here it may be with capital capital and who would never have dreamt of leaving their children uneducated at home but who unfortunately have acquired the habit of neglecting the education of their children in this new country of their adoption and of forgetting almost everything but the growing of crops and the material prospects of their families. It will require something more than the simple inducement offered by free education to cause these people to send their children to school and that something more is a compulsory provision. It will be seen from the Bill that compulsory education is introduced in a very mild - and gradual form. It is a new experiment in this country. I believe that it is altogether a new experiment as regards the English race. In England however an Act has been passed which is to have a sort of permissive operation with the view of trying the compulsory principle there. [714]   There are certain clauses in the last English Education Act which permit the local bodies to introduce within certain defined limits the principle of compulsory education. The Act restricts them as to the ages of children the hours of attendance and the fines to be imposed upon persons who disobey the regulations to be framed under the measure. Now we are going to try the experiment of compulsion upon the whole of the colony and I trust that we shall in this as we have done in some other cases set an example to our progenitors in England. I hope that it will be found a successful experiment in two particulars. In the first place I trust it will be admitted that it is not a tyrannical interference with private rights any more than a police law is; that the people generally will recognise that it is a crime to neglect the education of their children just as much as it is a crime to neglect to feed and clothe them. In the second place I hope that as soon as the law is passed it will be obeyed so that - just as when persons get into the habit of being sober they no longer require the law to restrain them from intoxication - when persons get into the habit of obeying this law the compulsory principle though it will continue on the statute-book will be a dead letter troubling no one. I now come to the question of free education. That is a point upon which I feel strongly. Everybody admits that those who cannot afford to pay school fees ought to have their children educated without paying any fees. Education being made compulsory a fortiori it would be slicer tyranny to fine a man who cannot send his children to school because he has not money to pay the school fees. The question then arises what is to be done? It may be said - "Remit the fees as at present". What does that mean? It degrades the children of poor people in the eyes of their neighbours into paupers; it turns them into recipients of alms. Does not experience show that children under those circumstances will not be in a fair position to learn side by side with the children of more favourably situated classes? Once admit that all children whether rich or poor ought to be educated; and it seems to me to follow as a matter of course that the State must pay for the education of these children. That is not almsgiving but the principle of co - operation carried out to its fullest extent. It is altogether a mistake to suppose that when we avail ourselves of any ordinary convenience of a civilized community paid for out of the taxes to which we all contribute directly or indirectly we take it as a gift. The child of the poorest parents who is sent without paying any fees to be educated by a master supported by the State does not receive his education in the way in which a child receives education at a charity school in England but he gets it as one of the advantages derived from living in a free country where all co-operate in supplying the common necessities.  What right has the State to interfere on the subject of education? That appears to me to lie on the threshold of every proposition of this nature because until we have ascertained what that right is it is utterly impossible to deal with the question. Abstractedly I contend that the State has no right at all to interfere with education any more than with a man's religion or his food or his clothing. Practically I will admit the right but only I wish it to be understood when the matter is regarded as one of police pure and simple. That ignorance is a prolific source of crime is an axiom nobody can be more fully inclined to accept than I am and it appears to me that only to that extent has the State a right to interfere with the question of education. That point established the next that arises is how and to what extent that interference is justifiable consistently with the maintenance of the proposition already placed on our statute-book involving the existence here of perfect civil and religious liberty and equality. If any system of education involving religious teaching is insisted upon by the State there is of course at once a palpable violation of the civil and religious liberty of the subject; and if on the other hand it is made compulsory to abstain utterly from all religious teaching the liberty of those who think that religious teaching ought to form part of all instruction is at once infringed. This appears to me to be the great difficulty in considering the Bill before us. I do not wish at the present stage to go at any length into the question; but I venture to say that the illustration made use of in regard to the endowed schools of the mother country affords no analogy to us. In the first place they are the endowments of private benefactors who had a perfect right to dispose of their benefaction in any manner or for any purpose they thought fit; but the principle fails at once when we apply it to a Legislature who have no right to apply the revenues of their country to the purposes of education in the same light. The question also arises - How shall education be enforced? because if it is not to be compulsory a different question will at once arise. If it is made compulsory we have to inquire to what extent the State is entitled to compel it. [717] I perfectly agree with the Government that the State has a right to compel education to a certain extent - an extent which it and all other bodies can recognise namely that of the elementary and primary education hinted at - but for persons to be compelled to educate their children in the manner which the State may deem requisite is quite another thing. If education is enforced up to a certain standard the difficulty which at once strikes me is the mode in which that standard is to be attained? I understand the Legislature declaring that all children shall be educated up to a certain standard but not the justice of establishing the mode in which it is to be done. When the State interferes to compel parents to educate their children in a certain manner it appears to me that the civil liberty of the subject is infringed. I was somewhat surprised when the Attorney-General stated that he considered this a party question because it struck me he was imperceptibly allowing himself to be dragged into the common herd of those who are too apt to make onslaughts on the personal liberty of the people of this country.  When we find a man like the Attorney-General allowing himself imperceptibly to be dragged in with those who are inclined to tyrannize over others it is high time to beware of persons who do not occupy the position which he does. That is the light in which I view this Bill. If the education of all children up to a certain point is to be paid for by the State I can understand the proposition; but I want to know why it should not be admitted also that a person who brings into the market an article in the shape of education equal to that procurable in any Government school but which has not been derived from sources provided by the State ought to be paid for it? I want to know why in point of fact we should establish government schools at all except in outlying districts where the population is sparse and small? Why in thickly populated districts there should be Government schools at all I cannot understand. If the State pays for schools it gives a certain amount of money to be divided among those who are to be educated according to their number. That amount is in effect divisible by the number to be taught. Why then if a certain sum is appropriated to each child for the purpose of his education should the Government not let the quota of money be spent wherever the person or persons concerned please? If some such principle were engrafted on this Bill it would remove many of the objections entertained to it [...] In fact we have very few details before us at present; but I merely wish honorable members to keep this broad principle in view before they come to consider the Bill at its second reading - to ask themselves whether they are willing to enforce throughout the country a system of education in which all people cannot equally and conscientiously participate. [718]  An honorable Member: Why?  Mr. Fellows: I don't want to know why. I don't care why. It is an infraction of personal liberty to ask why. it is their will and they choose it to be so - that is why. As to education being free that is a new view into which I do not wish to go now. I agree to education being compulsory provided the mode does not involve an infraction of personal liberty.  An Honorable Member. Is not compulsory education itself an infraction of personal liberty?  Mr. Fellows: I have already said that education must be regarded to a certain extent as a matter of police otherwise the State would have no right to interfere at all. To that extent I am quite prepared to vote for compulsory education provided the mode is left to the choice of those who are compelled to be taught. As to the secular division of the question it is just as tyrannical to compel secular education as to compel religious education. When a child is compelled to submit to religious education it is tyranny.  MR. G. V. SMITH. - Sir in the remarks I am about to make I shall endeavour to confine myself as much as possible to the principles of the measure under discussion and shall as far as I can avoid details. The details of public instruction can be properly dealt with in committee only and for committee I trust we shall reserve their consideration. The last speaker quoted Professor Blackie a good old tory and the honorable and learned member for Dalhousie alluded to the opinion of Sir Archibald Alison another tory. As the tories have always been the ablest advocates of ignorance I was very glad to hear those two high authorities quoted. [...] The Government Bill is a deliberate outrage of two rights which for thousands of years - for nearly all time - have been held most sacred by all mankind: the sacred right to be ignorant and the sacred right to be priest-ridden. Of course these two venerable sanctities will loudly denounce this treason to their time-honoured rule; and upon the present occasion the curses of the Church will probably accompany the blessings of the State just as a sprinkling of frogs occasionally accompanies a shower of rain the frogs doing but little damage while the rain does incalculable good. Good and evil are-so mingled so interfused in all earthly things that we must be content to attain a maximum of the former with a minimum of the latter in such a struggle as this - a struggle of education against ignorance of toleration against bigotry of progress against priest-craft of Christianity against superstition. Of Christianity against superstition I say - for we Victorians have now to combat the three superstitions of the three Kingdoms - the English superstition of Church and State the Scotch superstition of degrading the Bible to the level of Cocker of Colenso; and the Irish superstition which prefers Rome rule to Home rule. It is a most unfortunate fact that our Churches are still more exotic than patriotic - remembering and regarding Geneva and Rome which once supported them much more than Victoria which now supports them; and it is also unfortunate that these two religions of Rome and Geneva in England Ireland and Scotland have been persecuted and persecuting faiths so that even here at the antipodes embittering bigot-making recollections are associated with them - as English Or Irish - from which as Victorian beliefs they are fortunately free. [361] Therefore it should be our constant aim to render our churches less English or Genevese less Irish or Roman and more Victorian: certainly they must thus become better and more Christian purer and more patriotic faiths. More patriotic especially for what was it that gave to Catholicism in Ireland and to Protestantism in the Netherlands their most vital and their best their highest and holiest attributes; enabling them to conquer as it were the creeds of their far more powerful persecutors? It was this: the creed of the country became a patriotism - as well as. a faith and thus gathering strength from every source attained an energy a fervour a fire before which the creed of the conqueror withered into a -mere- dry and fruitless- formalism. In Ireland where oppressing Protestantism was English Catholicism became more Irish and more Roman for Rome aided Ireland against England then - as previously she had aided and as now again she aids England against Ireland; but the moment the last link of the oppressor's chain is broken by the disestablishment of the English Church - Catholicism becomes less Roman and Cardinal Cullen with his priesthood who take both spiritual and temporal inspiration from Rome- are openly defied and defeated in their efforts against Home rule. And so it will be here before many days for Irishmen in Victoria will not be less free less enlightened or less patriotic than their countrymen in Kerry. In Victoria as in Ireland Rome rule will be vanquished by Home rule as the clergy and Mr. Dease were vanquished by the laity; and as Mr. Blannerhassett a liberal Protestant was preferred and elected by a liberal Catholic constituency over an illiberal Catholic chosen by the church so it will be here. The Catholics of Victoria will do as the Catholics of Kerry have done saying plainly to their priests who would guide our actions as Rome may dictate - 'We Victorians know better than Romans how Victoria should be governed and we will no longer tolerate Roman dictation in Victorian affairs nor priestly control in political matters.' [362] The late elections sufficiently prove that and day by day an increasing number of the laity will disregard and resent ecclesiastical intrusion until here as in America the clergy will cease to intrude - the clergy will confine themselves to their legitimate spiritual province - the Church no longer encroaching upon the State because the State has ceased to encroach upon the Church. In spite of all that is said and written about education in spite of all the professions made in its behalf the urgent necessities of the case are not yet understood or appreciated by the public - the fact that as society is entitled to the protection which gaols afford so it is still better entitled to the more economic and efficacious the more praiseworthy and powerful protection which schools afford; the fact that where universal suffrage is there universal education must be there it becomes the first and most important duty of the State the mainspring of its government; and therefore the education of Victoria like the government of other states must be the very best the State can afford to give. We demand it as a right and we claim both quality and quantity on such a scale as shall elevate the national character - and that of education - for we make the demand on a great national principle not on the degrading pauper principle which in England doles out educational alms to the niggardly extent of the three R's. We want three very different R's in conjunction with three S's namely - self-reliance self-respect and self-restraint; for less than these in a nation means defective national education.  Again the Legislature has said and cannot now unsay it that every man throughout the length and breadth of the country shall have political power. It is the duty of the State to see that the men who go to the ballot-box understand the questions which are submitted to their decision - and that they bring an intelligent mind to bear upon the exercise of the franchise. [363] If they do not use their political privileges intelligently what will be the effect on this House? It is a truism that the whole is equal to the parts composing it; and if the parts composing this House are not men of intelligence the House itself is bound to reflect their want of intelligence. Therefore for the welfare and good government of the country it is essential that those to whom political power is given should be educated and be able to exercise that power intelligently. That can only be done by establishing a system of free education throughout the length and breadth of the country. It must be free because it is to be compulsory; and being compulsory it can only lead to one result - that the next generation will be able to boast that there is no Victorian uneducated. With its people educated I believe that this country whether in commerce in political power or in anything else will not be behind other nations in the race of life.   And now sir as we have had the fanciful theory of Sir Archibald Alison as to the effect of education upon crime I do not think it will be out of place to quote a little evidence on the other side. I have here the report of a commission appointed by Her Majesty to inquire into the education given in schools in England edited by the Rev. James Fraser assistant-commissioner and I find in it this statement in reference to Prussia: -   In 1819 compulsory laws requiring every parent to educate every child were enacted in Prussia. At first there was a violent opposition and the usual hue-and-cry of 'invaded rights'; but in 12 years crime and pauperism had diminished 40 per cent. Now no person would dare to propose a repeal of these laws.   I have here also in a volume entitled Questions for a Reformed Parliament an essay by the Rev. C. S. Parker fellow of University College Oxford which contains a number of interesting statements including the following by Mr. Tuffnell an inspector of education: [364]  It is well known the larger proportion of criminals have been orphans in early life and yet the orphan class is precisely that which turns out best in district schools. Thus if you do not educate them they become thieves and paupers; if you- do they become well conducted productive workpeople. - -  I also find in the same work this piece- of information: - 'In Switzerland a reformed system of education has almost emptied the gaols.' -MR. DUFFY. - What sort of education?  MR. LANGTON. - Any kind of education. 'In July 1863 there was not a soul in the prison of the Canton de Vaud; it was much the same at Zurich; at Neufchâtel there were two prisoners. In the Grand Duchy of Baden where great efforts were made in 1834 for the improvement of education the number of prisoners fell in eight years (1854 to 1861) from 1426 to 691; the number of thefts from 1009 became 460; pauperism decreased by one-fourth; and gaols had to be closed. . . - In Germany generally the number of criminal convictions was diminished between 1827 and 1862 by 30 per cent. In France and in England improvement of the same kind can be traced standing in good proportion to the labour which has been expended on education.  When the honorable member for Dalhousie asks me what class of education is this of which I am speaking I say it is the very class of education which the honorable member himself has been describing as tending to scepticism. The honorable member cannot choose to say that it is not a secular system of education that is given in those countries because he has already pointed out that the system of education which exists there is diametrically opposed to that which he wishes to be established in this colony. But we need not go to any of those countries for the purpose of ascertaining what is the effect of instruction upon crime. We can turn to the statistics of our own colony and obtain close at home information of a more valuable character. - Those statistics show that in 1871 there were taken into custody in this colony 22800 people. [365] Of that number how many does the House suppose were possessed of a superior education? No more than 156. Only 5500 could read and write well. The remaining 17000 were so badly educated that either they could not read at all or they could read only and not write. When we come to the number of those convicted we find the same startling disparity. In 1871 there were tried and convicted 478 persons. How many of those were well instructed? Just seven. Now I don't think we shall hear any more during this debate of the tendency of instruction of any kind to encourage the growth of crime.  The first conference of delegates from the various miners' associations in the colony was commenced at Sandhurst on Wednesday. Mr. R. Clark of Sandhurst was voted to the chair. Representatives from the associations were present as follow: - . Sandhurst Association - Messrs. R. Clark C. Hobbs L. Patterson and R. Nagle; Golden Square Branch - Isaac Vickers. Clunes Association - Messrs. J. Blanchard and H. Taylor. Blackwood Association - J. Gard and G. Corrigan. St. Arnaud Association. - J. Rowe and Henry Thorne. Maldon Association - L. Tregloun and W. Scott. Haddon Association - W. Davis and R. Eddy. Stawell Association - J. Hunter and F. Robertson. Buninyong Association - J. Black. Malmsbury Association - C. Williams and J. Banks.  The first business on the programme was the question of amalgamating all the miners' associations in the colony. The advisability of this step was discussed at length and Mr. Eddy moved and Mr. Card seconded - "That the various associations represented at this conference be amalgamated forthwith." The motion was put and carried unanimously. The name of the amalgamated association was next considered and it was decided - "That the name of the amalgamated body be the Amalgamated Miners' Association of Victoria."  The constitution and government of the association and the adoption of a code of bye-laws framed by the Sandhurst Society were next considered. It was decided to appoint a sub-committee to consider them in the evening.  It was moved by Mr. Corrigan - -"That this conference is in favour of a board of arbitration being appointed." Carried.  The establishment of an accident society in connection with the amalgamated association was next brought up. It was agreed - "That this conference recognise the necessity of establishing a miners' accident society in connection with this association and instruct the sub-committee to frame rules for its management."  The Chairman said the next question to be considered was the Mining Accident Bill. After a long discussion the conference decided to postpone the further consideration of the act until next day when the secretary was instructed to obtain more copies. [741]  The next business was the consideration of an Eight Hours Bill. Mr. Blanchard moved and Mr. Williams seconded - "That this conference request the various miners' associations in the colony to petition the Government to bring in an Eight Hours Bill as a Government measure as early as possible." Carried.  The preparation of a Trades Union Bill was then discussed. Mr. Hobbs moved - "That the Minister of Mines be requested to bring in a Trades Union Bill as soon as possible." Mr. Banks seconded the motion. The motion was put and carried unanimously.  The question of Chinese labor was next brought up and Mr. Taylor of Clunes moved - "That a clause be inserted in the bye-laws prohibiting members of the association working in the same mine as Chinamen." Mr. Hobbs seconded the motion which was carried. An amendment proposed by Mr. Hunter and seconded by Mr. Black urging the Government to impose a poll-tax on the Chinese was lost.  The immigration question having been discussed by the conference a resolution was passed in opposition to free immigration as it was considered that the supply of labor in the colony was far in excess of the demand; and further that if public money were expended on this object such a course would be an injustice to the working classes.  The advisability of amalgamating with the engine-drivers and other trades connected with mining was left in the hands of a subcommittee.  On the labor covenants in mining leases being considered it was moved by Mr. Hunter and seconded by Mr. Black - "That the secretary write to the Minister of Mines calling his attention to the habitual evasion of the labor clauses in the mining leases." This was carried. Mr. Corrigan moved and Mr. Rowe seconded - "That mining inspectors maintain in addition to other duties strict supervision over leases re the labor clauses; that the number of officers be increased as required and that they report upon the claims monthly." Carried.  The conference then adjourned.   To Colonel Warburton.  SIR - We who are now present acting not only for ourselves but for those belonging to our community who are prevented from being present on this auspicious occasion beg to offer you and your party a sincere warm and hearty welcome to this the North District of Western Australia and to congratulate you that after boldly planning and undertaking the conduct of an expedition through a vast arid and totally unknown portion of Central Australia you have nobly encountered and overcome difficulties and dangers of all kinds which up to this time were apparently insurmountable and have finally risen victorious over all obstacles without having sacrificed the life of even one human being to your heroic enterprise.  This is a result for which we cannot be too thankful to an ever-watchful and Omnipotent Providence and it is our opinion that the indomitable pluck energy and perseverance shown by yourself and party have entitled you to the lasting gratitude of the inhabitants of your own and neighbouring colonies. [303] That your wanderings should have terminated in this district is a matter of congratulation to us as we cannot but feel that the pastoral and mineral capabilities of our adopted country only required to be viewed and reported upon by a competent and disinterested person for the natural result to follow of a large influx of settlers and stock to our vast pastoral lands and of miners and capital to our neglected minerals.  "In conclusion we beg to reiterate our hearty welcome to yourself and party and trusting that you will soon be re-united to your expectant families and friends in South Australia have the honour to subscribe ourselves sir  Your sincere well-wishers  R. P. Sholl.  H. W. VENN.  FREDK. PEARSE.  P. RUTHERFORD RYLEY." &c. &c.  To Colonel P. Egerton Warburton commanding Exploring Party from South Australia.  SIR - We the Municipal Council and inhabitants of Fremantle offer you and your brave comrades our warmest congratulations on the successful completion of your long and trying journey through what has been hitherto an unknown country and your safe arrival at the principal port of the colony of Western Australia.  The difficulties to be overcome in the work of Australian exploration are acknowledged to be as formidable as are to be found in any part of our globe and to meet these difficulties requires a combination of intelligence energy perseverance and fortitude that few men possess; and the fact that you have surmounted all obstacles and borne up under so many privations has awakened in all our minds the deepest feelings of gratitude and admiration.  The discoveries now to be revealed to the world by your report of the country through which you have passed will be not only an acquisition to scientific knowledge but a boon to the growing population of this island continent destined we believe at some future day to be the seat of a great a free and intelligent nation.  Among the names of the pioneers of civilization yours sir will hold a distinguished place; and when we remember with regret that so many brave men - such as Leichhardt Burke and Wills - have perished in similar attempts to explore the unknown portions of Australia we rejoice that you and your companions in your journey are spared to receive our congratulations. [305]  We are deeply grateful to Almighty God by Whose kind Providence your lives have been preserved and it is our hope sir that you may live for many years in the enjoyment of health and strength cheered by the esteem of your fellow-men and with the consciousness that you have accomplished a great and noble work.  Signed on behalf of the Town Council and inhabitants of Fremantle  W. E. Marmion  Chairman Town Council.  Fremantle March 1874."  To Colonel Peter Egerton Warburton. Leader of the South Australian Exploring Expedition.  SIR - We the Council and Burgesses of the city of Perth congratulate you on the successful termination of your enterprise. The brave spirit which animated Captain Roe the Gregorys and Austin on our side of the continent equally impelled Oxley Sturt Mitchell Leichhardt Stuart and yourself on its eastern side. The results to civilization have been vast and purchased with much suffering have placed your names in the front rank of benefactors to mankind. Last on the list it must be cheering to you to know that under Divine Providence having accomplished the difficult and hazardous undertaking entrusted to you you have thus prepared the way for future explorers still further to disclose to us the characteristics and resources of our island continent. We feel pride in being the first representatives of an Australian city to express to you their thanks and admiration of the energy skill and prudence you have displayed in the cause of exploration. [306] We would also record our gratitude to God Who has preserved the lives of yourself and brave companions through all the perils of the way and thus enabled us to give you our hearty greeting to-day.  On behalf of the Council and Burgesses of Perth  G. RANDELL  Chairman of Perth Municipality. 