 I for instance though extremely anxious for the introduction of new population and believing that there can be no grander policy for a new country - for instead of being a paltry question between Capital and labour it is a large question of national policy - one of the very grandest of all policies for a new country - I nevertheless whilst entertaining this view confess that in the introduction of new population I am likely to come into conflict with people who entertain my own views on that question and who have cheered me during the last few minutes. I am anxious to preserve the present elements of the population. I am therefore not of opinion with the honourable member for Boorowa as I heard him express himself some weeks ago that we ought to establish any system of immigration irrespective of the question whether it would be likely to change the character of the population of this country. [249] I am as willing as I can be to assist in bringing Englishmen Scotchmen and Irishmen here; but I am not willing to bring the people of one country at the expense of the people of another kingdom. I would not I say at once give my support to any immigration which had a tendency to change the British character of the population as it now exists. I disclaim any hostility to the people of any of the three kingdoms but I would lend no advocacy of mine - on the contrary I would advance every opposition in my power - to the bringing here of a majority of people from Ireland. I hope I may be able to express this opinion boldly and without reserve without being charged with bigotry or with a dislike to the Irish people. I say that I want to preserve a majority of Englishmen and the descendents of Englishmen in this country. I say moreover and unpleasant and painful as it may be it is a matter which ought not to be shirked that I want to preserve the teaching and influence of the Protestant religion in the country and I would lend no assistance whatever to any scheme which would have a tendency to depress the Protestant elements now in existence. For this reason I am an advocate for the immigration to this country being regulated by whatever the census returns will show to be the elements of the population of the three kingdoms now existing in the colony. I think that is quite fair and equitable and that there ought to be no objection to it. I do not think that we ought to be charged with illiberality because we object to a movement of the population which would change the character of the country.  ACT THREE  SCENE ONE  The mining camp in Australia twelve months after. Time scene opens with a dance after which the characters break up into groups - SMIFFERS and REBECCA IVO and other characters.  JOE: Now then clear the course here for the sack race.   OMNES: The sack race! The sack race!  (Business.)  Here they come! Here they come!  (Business. SMIFFERS knocks against JINKS.)   JINKS: Where are you going to eh? Get out!  (Business with REBECCA. who knocks JOE on the head with her parasol.)  JOE: Here I say what are you up to?  REBECCA: Keep hoff or I'll prod yer.  OMNES: Here they come here they come! Clear the course!  (Business with sack race etc.)  JOE: Now then all this way to the ring for the wrestling match. All this way!  OMNES: The wrestling watch! All this way! etc.  JINKS: (to REBECCA) Excuse me Miss are you engaged for the next dance?  REBECCA: I ham not nor is I likely to be. I hain't in the habit of dancing with her Colonial.  JINKS: Oh you needn't put any frills on. I suppose you're going to have a turn with the chimney ornament.  (He indicates SMIFFERS.)  REBECCA: Chimney ornament! Don't you go a-chaffing of me young man as two can play at that game. [32]  JINKS: I pass.  REBECCA: Eh?  JINKS: Don't play - -I pass.  REBECCA: I believe yer does - anythink from a lead sixpence to a bad sovereign.  JINKS: That's one for the orphan anyhow.  (Business. Enter MONTE JACK and BUTTONER. Three card trick etc.)  Here's a lark. The three card monte man and his buttoner in full black. (Singing) Will you walk into my parlour says the spider to the fly.  MONTE JACK: Now then gents pop it down - the simplest game as is now. Here you goes - There he is. - Now you see him Then you don't! Three cards - a nine a four - -and a blooming king - and what you has to do is to find the picter card. Now. skin yer lamps and watch. One two three and away she goes! I bets live to ten fifteen bob or a quid as nobody   (Business with cards.)  REBECCA: Oh Smiffers it's has heasy as say knife! I see him safe as houses.  (Business. BUTTONER holds tip note.)  MONTE: You goes a sov sir? Done sir. Which on 'em sir? Mind what you're hat sir.  (BUTTONER picks up king.)  OMNES: Hurrah he's got the right one!  (Business.)  MONTE: Well who'd a thought it - you poked him first time! Here's your money sir. Now here we goes agin. One two three and there's the king - the nine - and the four - any part of a flyer nobody finds the king!  (Business.) [33]  Now gents pop it down. (To SMIFFERS) Pop it down pop it down. You sir?  (SMIFFERS nods.)  How much sir? One sov? Two - or three?  SMIFFERS: Three.  MONTE: Right you is three thick 'uns it is and I gives yer the straight griffen - what you has to do is to spot his Royal Nibs. If you catches the king! give you three pound and if the bobby catches me he gives me three months.  (All laugh.)  Now then where's yer three quid?  (Business. REBECCA puts three sovereigns on table and picks up wrong card.)  REBECCA: It's the wrong one - who'd have thought it!  (He takes up money. All laugh. Enter POLICEMAN.)  It's a burgerly and a swindle. I'll have my money back!  (All laugh.)  Here policeman collar him!  (POLICEMAN does so.)  MONTE: Here cheese it cheese it!  REBECCA: Take him away officer he's a garrotter.  MONTE: Here I say copper what yer doing interfering with the working man like this?  (Business with POLICEMAN. Exit all except principal characters.)  REBECCA: (to SMIFFERS) And you standing there like a stuck pig and the man bolting with my money!  SMIFFERS: Your money! If I remember distincually it was my money! [34]  REBECCA: P. Smiffers Esquire as the future Mrs. Smiffers I begs to remark that what's yours is mine and what's mine's my own and if ever I catches you gambling again -  SMIFFERS: Rebecca Hann it was yourself!  REBECCA: Don't contradict me Smiffers or I gives yer yer walking ticket and marries the sergeant and that'll upset your applecart!  (Exit SMIFFERS and REBECCA. GRUMP now drunk rolls from the bar. Enter BUBS and IVO.)  BUBS: (to GRUMP) Hello mate. Enjoying yourself as usual? He has been going it and no mistake!  IVO: Seems a little off-colour. Friend of yours?  BUBS: Oh no. I've seen him about the camp. The boys call him Grump He's a hatter.  IVO: Is he? By Jove when he's sober I can give him a job.  BUBS: Eh?  IVO: I sat on my stalker the other day.  BUBS: Oh you muggins!  IVO: Muggins! Thank you.  BUBS: You don't see it?  IVO: I certainly do not.  BUBS: He fossicks up the gully alone. He's a fossicker.  IVO: A whaticker?  BUBS: A fossicker.  IVO: You said he was a hatter just now.  BUBS: So he is - works by himself - plays a lone hand d'ye tumble?  IVO: Certainly not - -what should I tumble for?  BUBS: Oh you don't take?  IVO: Oh I see. Tumble - oh yes I tumble now to 'tumble' but I don't altogether tumble to the other tumble.  BUBS: Well. Grump is a digger who fossicks and digs alone without mates and that's what we call a hatter. D'ye see?  IVO: Oh yes I see - I tumble now all over.  BUBS: Oh dear you're still an awful New Chum. You're green enough for a jackeroo.  IVO: A what?  BUBS: Never heard of a jackeroo?  IVO: No. I've heard of a Mick hurroo but never a Jack. [35]  (BUBS laughs. Cheers are heard off for MATT MORLEY. Enter MATT and CLARICE.)  MORLEY: Thank you boys. Hope you are all enjoying yourselves. It's a beautiful day regular Queen's weather and I'm going to shout all round that we may drink Her Majesty's health.  (All cheer.)  Before I do will you just give three cheers for her. Now hats off boys!  (All take hats off but two IRISHMEN.)  Three cheers for the Queen!  (All cheer but the two IRISH MEN.)  JINKS: (to IRISHMEN) Why didn't you take off your hats and cheer?  (JINKS knocks off one IRISH MAN's hat and IVO the other's. Fight with IRISHMEN. Enter SMIFFERS REBECCA and SWOOP.)  SWOOP: Come on wid you. I'll teach ye to beat the Force! (He seizes SMIFFERS.)  REBECCA: Murder!  MORLEY: Hold on there what's the matter?  SWOOP: Obstructing the Force and creating a disturbance. Go on now.  (All hoot and howl.)  MORLEY: You've got the wrong party. The man you want ran down there. You go after him and I'll take care of this fellow till you come back. (Handing him money) And you can drink the Queen's health meanwhile.  SWOOP: Ah sure I couldn't do it. [36]  MORLEY: Oh yes you can now.  SWOOP: Faith I could not.  MORLEY: There he is --that's the man  SWOOP: What yonder?  MORLEY: Yes.  SWOOP: The man that made the row?  MORLEY: The very same.  SWOOP: Sure I'll run him in - I'll teach him to break the peace and attack the Force.  (Exit. Business with REBECCA and SMIFFERS. Enter JOE.)  JOE: Order! Order! Have you heard the news?  OMNES: No.  JOE: They've just found a terrific nugget in Matt Morley's claim and Ben Brewer and your men are bringing it here on the road to the bank.  (All cheer.)  Here they come. Make room there - look out.  (Enter BEN JINKS MINERS etc. They wheel on the nugget.)  MORLEY: Well BEN old boy what's up?  JINKS: Spit it out Ben old sport.  OMNES: Give it mouth!  BEN: I'm a digger I am and I ain't much on palaver but what I says I means and what I says I does and what I says old pal (to MORLEY) is as we've struck it hot - that's what we have struck it hot.  BUBS: Good for you Benny old man! We're in!  BEN: What did I say that night to my mates! Here Hub and Matt why says I I has a presentiment as how the Queen's Birthday is going to turn up trumps and I'm going to work for luck says I on speck. Did I say that or didn't I?  MORLEY: You did Ben old man you did.  BUBS: Right you are Benny old man.  BEN: Well I'm a digger I am and what I means I says and what I Says I does. So this morning I goes to the claim and we've struck it hot that's what we have - and it's there. [37]  JINKS: Show it up Benny old toucher!  BEN: It's the Queen's Birthday as brings him forth - it's the Queen's flag as covers him - and here he is - the Birthday Nugget!  BUBS: My word he is a beauty.  MORLEY: He's a daisy and no flies.  JINKS: Ain't he a whopper I don't think!  OMNES: Oh what a big 'un!  MORLEY: Lift him up Ben.  (Business. All cheer.)  MORLEY: He weighs a bit.  BEN: Seven thousand pounds' worth if there's a pennyweight. I'm a digger I am and I know.  MORLEY: Back he goes and off to the bank with him. BEN: There he lies. I call him the Birthday Nugget - found him on the Old Woman's birthday - I wraps him up in the Old Flag.  (All cheer loudly.)  OMNES: Aye sing the song! Go it Morley! Now then old pal - SONG AND CHORUS  CURTAIN  SCENE TWO   Night scene in bush near diggings. Enter BLACK STEVE.  STEVE: Come on. Couldn't strike a better place than this.  (Enter DICK DUGGAN and POUNCE.)  DUGGAN: This will do. Drop down to that tree Steve and see no one comes up the gully.  STEVE: All right.  (Exit.) [38]  DUGGAN: Now then mate there's no one else within cooeeing distance. What ye got to say?  POUNCE: Hush! Not so loud. We must be careful sir careful altho' it's a mere matter of business sir - nothing more.  DUGGAN: All right - spit it out. And look here - take off them goggles when you're jawing to me. I want to see that you're dealing on the square. There's no one to spot you here - -take 'em off.  (POUNCE does so.)  Now what do you want with us ?  POUNCE: Hush! You know Matt Morley don't you?  DUGGAN: I do.  POUNCE: Ah yes yes and I'm told that you've no particular reason to love him.  DUGGAN: Love him!  POUNCE: Hush my dear sir. For Heaven's sake be quiet.  DUGGAN: Well get on. If you know who I am and that bad blood's between Matt Morley and me come straight to what you want at once.  POUNCE: Yes certainly yes. You don't love him and if you could you'd pay him the grudge you owe him.  DUGGAN: I would.  POUNCE: Good very good. Now I know another party who has a grudge against this Morley and who wouldn't mind paying liberally to gratify that grudge.  DUGGAN: What do you want done and what'll you pay?  POUNCE: Well you see my principal objects to Mr. Morley's presence in England and he's willing to pay certain sums to any person who will prevent said Mr. Morley leaving the Colonies.  DUGGAN: There's one sure way to prevent him. (Drawing pistol) Is it this you mean?  Pounce: Put it up it's dangerous - besides I said nothing of violence.  DUGGAN: No you didn't but I don't suppose you'd cry your eyes out if he'd an ounce of lead in him. What d'yer pay for it?  POUNCE: Nothing at all sir. Good gracious I suggested a simple thing - - that as long as Mr. Morley stayed in the Colonies my principal is prepared to pay certain sums --- - -mere matter of business nothing more. [39]  DUGGAN: What makes you think he's going to leave?  POUNCE: That's my business sir. Why shouldn't he? His claim's turned out well and today I hear they've found a gigantic nugget.  DUGGAN: Eh! They have! Where is it! What's its value?  POUNCE: They took it to the bank and I'm told it's worth six or seven thousand pounds.  DUGGAN: Well suppose I says as 'ow Matt Morley shan't leave the Colonies for England what's yer pay if I stop him?  I now come to the other principle of the Bill which has been most thoroughly discussed - the proposal (contained in clauses 45 to 49) to abolish what is known in Victoria as plural voting. This proposal may be defended on a variety of grounds into which it is undesirable - or at all events unnecessary - to enter. I do not propose to start as antagonistic critics of the proposal might desire by any metaphysical argument upon the rights of man nor will I accept the challenge which has been thrown out by them to the effect that the assertion of the principle of time abolition of plural voting implies an assertion that all men are absolutely equal in respect both of their intellectual power and their moral worth. [379] No such allegation need underlie the proposition which is now submitted to this Chamber.  We know that already all men are equal before the law. We know that every step which has been taken in any country enjoying representative institutions with reference to the franchise has been in the direction first of the extension and next of the equalization of that franchise. The reason why it was restricted in the first instance will be easily recollected by honorable members who are familiar with the history of the franchise in the mother country from which we derive our constitutional liberties. Although possibly there may have been in the first instance when representative government took its first steps so great a difference between the opportunities of enlightenment offered by different conditions of life in different classes of society as to apparently justify some difference in the political power which was entrusted to them we all know that the steady progress 'even in the old world in the equalization of conditions during the last century or two has led to an equalization of the franchise. The necessity for re-adjusting the franchise from time to time has been recognised again and again in the Parliament of Great Britain. And if it has been recognised there how much more should it be recognised in this country where the equalization of conditions has reached a stage as yet unapproached in the old world. Class distinctions should be swept away in Australia when we find that even those classes who are engaged in manual labour instead of being as their fathers were in the past - a landless penniless and illiterate class of the community - are themselves small capitalists possessors of property men of education thought and intelligence. intelligence If it be admitted that in no country of the World is there so general a distribution of property so wide a diffusion of intelligence and of education as in this surely in no country of the world is there so strong a case as exists in this for the equalization of political privileges. What is proposed by the Bill is not an absolute equalization of political privileges in Victoria but an equalization only as regards 'the Legislative Assembly. Those who will object to this proposition on the ground that the propertied classes in this community should enjoy some exceptional representation- that men who by their own industry or from 'any other cause have become possessed of an exceptional share of the material goods of life should have exceptional recognition in the electoral franchise - must remember that they have already under our Constitution the most full and most adequate if not undue representation. They have a Chamber elected on a strictly property suffrage whose representatives are required to have a property qualification and which cannot be dissolved even when it is out of harmony with the people at large. That Chamber possesses at present the power of an absolute veto upon all legislation even though it may have been already endorsed by an overwhelming majority of the representatives of the whole people. [380] So represented in a body so entrenched with such special and extraordinary powers surely the propertied classes in this community can never claim that they should have in addition to this a controlling influence in this House. Such a claim would be unfair and unjust; it could not bear careful and candid examination. It is not necessary that I should here enter into the general question of the representation of property in the electoral system because that is not the question at issue in connexion with plural voting. If that question were to be argued it might be necessary to call attention to the fact that the master-thinkers on political subjects in the old world - among whom may be mentioned that distinguished authority John Stuart Mill - have expressly condemned the existence of any property franchise or qualification in a constitutionally-governed country. We are relieved from the necessity of entering upon that argument since we find that the question of plural voting does not involve the question of the representation of property. The plural voting which we propose to abolish is not given on any basis of property whatever. There may be and there probably are in this country men who may be termed millionaires who have no more than one vote for the Legislative Assembly and one vote for the Legislative Council because their property consists of bank shares and other stocks. A man may be a mining investor on a gigantic scale; he may be possessed of a stake in the country in shares and stock which depend for their returns upon the progress and prosperity of the colony as much as landed property does; he may be a millionaire in possession of these sources of wealth; and yet he may have only one vote for the Legislative Assembly. He may be a landed millionaire and yet enjoy no advantage in connexion with plural voting. If it be thought as it has been argued in the mother country that the possession of land is different from the possession of any other class of property and that the proprietorship of land should be specially recognised - an argument in which there is some force but which we are not called upon to debate at the present time - the fact remains that a man may be a millionaire in landed property in this country and yet have no more than one vote. Why then should plural voting be defended? What is the principle - for surely there must be a principle - on which the system is based? The principle if it be stated in its simplicity and nakedness is that under our present Constitution a man should have extra votes not according to his wisdom intelligence education or wealth but according to the proportion in which his landed property may by design or accident be divided among different constituencies. It offers a premium not for education intelligence or even for the possession of wealth or handed property but a premium for land - jobbing for allotment-dividing among different constituencies. Under the existing system it is quite possible for a man possessed of comparatively small property to have in the suburbs of Melbourne fifteen or twenty votes whereas a man with property of enormous value might have only one or two. [381] [...] Let us ask those who support plural voting another question. Let us ask them to consider what they imply by their contention - what they mean by claiming to continue the extra votes given to men who have scattered allotments of land as against those who have not scattered allotments. They imply by their efforts to retain this system a distrust of the manhood of this colony - a complete mistrust of its judgment and its justice. They imply that the bulk of the electors of this colony if left to themselves if governed simply by reason and swayed only by motives of public policy would reject fair proposals relating to property and insist upon approving unfair proposals. That distrust of the people of this colony is one which is quite unwarranted either by our political history or by out recent experiences. We are told by visitors to this country that our great festivals are remarkable for one thing more than another and that is the capacity of our people to control themselves. Whether they are assembled in immense bodies of tens of thousands for purposes of festivity or even of provocation they are perfectly able to control themselves. If we look back at our political history even in its fiercest and bitterest periods we do not find any attempt on the part of those who believed themselves to be the majority to carry their views except by constitutional means at the ballot-box. [...] Then it is argued that it is necessary to retain plural voting for the protection of property. The protection of property against whom? Who is to assail property unless it is protected? Whose property is to be protected? In this colony there is practically no class that can be called unpropertied. If that be the case - if the whole people of this country roughly speaking are propertied - whom is property to be protected against? If as the statistics show almost nine-tenths of the people are propertied what possible fear can there be of the remaining one tenth who are supposed not to be propertied but who in many cases are also in the process of becoming propertied? Again some people believe that plural voting is a protection to the minority against the majority - that majority - that it enables a minority to cast on a few trying times and on particular occasions; a majority of votes.  But I would ask honorable members to consider whether if a minority and majority are so evenly divided as that would go to show so narrow a majority could accomplish anything. At least it could only secure a trifling and temporary triumph which surely might be as easily gained if the minority has right and justice on its side by the ordinary constitutional methods of public agitation and education. Why disturb the whole machinery of our electoral system why create suspicion and distrust on all sides simply to retain three or four seats? If the minority is so strong that it only needs three or four seats to turn it into a majority surely it does not need this agency; it only needs if it has right on its side to take advantage of the means of public education. [382] On the other hand if the minority is so weak as to be beaten even with these three or four seats of what value are they? Of no value whatever bunt only a source of irritation to the opponents of the system. It is said again and the objection is one which is most frequently urged although it is a sentimental objection that the great argument against the abolition of plural voting is that you place the "gaspipe loafer" - the "man who sleeps in the gaspipe" - on the same level with the wealthiest best-educated or most able man in the community in regard to his vote. Before dealing with the question of placing men on a level let honorable members recall to their memories the struggles which have taken place in this colony and say whether at any time when there was a contest between the majority and the minority the "gaspipe loafers" were found on the side of the majority or the minority? The "gaspipe loafers" are men who are always to be had by the candidate who spends money most freely. It is not the party of the majority that expects or gains anything from the "gaspipe loafers". The "gaspipe loafers" to a man cast their votes on the opposite side as many of us have reason to know and the wealthy advocates of extra votes to property and of the rights of property are never safer than when they can appeal to a constituency which contains a considerable share of the "gaspipe" vote. But sir does giving the "man in the gaspipe" a vote place him on a level with the man of education of intelligence or of property? Why what do we all do when we present ourselves before the electors? Do we solicit votes only? Not so. We know that in almost every case what counts for far more than a man's vote if he be a man is the influence he brings to bear upon others in the winning of many votes. Wealth has its natural and just influence in every community. The possessor of wealth especially of wealth wisely used - employed in the development of the country - connects himself in a dozen ways with the manhood of this country and receives a response which has never yet been denied. [...] Equalizing votes like equalizing men before the law will not alter the merits of a case although establishing a fair principle for its decision. A minority which has on its side wealth and may also have on its side a certain amount of education and intelligence in consequence always carries with it a considerable power. The proposal to continue plural voting is not a proposal made to protect property and scarcely a proposal to protect the minority. if looked at rightly it simply is an effort on the part of people who possess plural votes because they have a certain kind of property to be relieved of the first and greatest duty which devolves upon them as citizens of a democracy - the duty to submit to tire rule of the majority and never to consent to win a victory except with the consent and approbation of the majority of their fellow citizens... lie community will recognise that in equalizing political privileges they are taking no step that offers the slightest suggestion of danger to any class interest to any propertied interest or to any educational interest in the colony. [383] On the contrary leaving property to its own natural influence apart from the franchise places its interests on their only sure and permanent foundation. Not only the majority of the people to-day but the majority - and the great majority - of the people of this country for years past have been opposed to this system of plural voting. The great majority of members in this House to-day and the great majority of members in this House for sessions and Parliaments past have been in favour of the abolition of plural voting.  Well sir if the majority of the people of this country and the majority of Members of Parliament in this House are opposed to plural voting who can hope to retain it? It is not for me to deal with the suggestion which has been made that even if the proposal to abolish plural voting is assented to by the country at large and by this House yet the proposal after passing the popular Chamber will not become law. I cannot entertain such a suggestion. The proposal which we make relates only to our own Chamber; it relates only to the franchise by which members of this House are elected; it has been endorsed by those who sent us here to represent them it is endorsed by the great majority of the representatives in this House - and who is it then can stand or should stand between the expression of opinion of the electors and of their representatives in this House and its consummation? I cannot believe that so unfortunate a circumstance should occur as that any Chamber elected on a different franchise should criticise the means which are used by the people of this country for obtaining an Assembly in which they have confidence. To do so would only be to shift the criticism froth the franchise which we are now discussing and which relates to this House to another franchise and another representation which do not belong to this House. It will surely be admitted that by constitutional rule and practice the majority of the electors of this House with the majority of their representatives are entitled to the final and absolute control of the means by which this House is elected.  What is sought is that these means shall be made in harmony with the principles upon which our self-government is based and in harmony with the principles on which the Legislatures of America  have already based the representation of many of the States of its great and prosperous Union. The friends of plural voting look in vain for any principle on which they can justify the retention of the system. Even if they argue in favour of proportionate property representation they cannot possibly defend plural voting. Though they may avoid and evade the issue now put to them they cannot defend fairly and squarely the principle on which plural voting is based - the principle of multiplying votes according to the multiplication of allotments - as a principle which should be maintained in any constitutionally-governed country. And if they ask themselves what is the end which this agitation is bound to have - the conclusion which whether near or remote is absolutely certain - they will see that their postponement of the inevitable will not help them in any way and that their efforts to retain their advantage are only aggravating the sense of injury which the great majority of the electors feel. [384] While not benefiting the cause which they have at heart they are furnishing a constant source of distrust and disquiet to the great body of the people who if they are determined on anything are determined on one thing and that is that plural voting shall be abolished.  The sentiment in favour of self-government has been growing up for a great many years; in fact we have always looked upon it that this representative form of government is merely a steppingstone to the fuller and freer form which is enjoyed by the neighbouring colonies; indeed the Imperial statutes under which our present constitution is established provide that upon the Legislative Council of the colony passing a measure in favour of self-government that shall become the law after the Bill has lain for 30 days on the Table of the House of Commons. [332] So that naturally when we took upon ourselves representative institutions we looked upon it that it was only a stepping-stone to self-government and we were confirmed in that view by the various despatches from the Colonial Office. I remember in 1874 when the Legislature read a Bill for a second time in favour of self-government upon the question being referred to the Colonial Office Lord Carnarvon I believe who then held the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies sent a despatch to the Governor which was laid before the Legislature and published in the colony. While Lord Carnarvon deprecated the idea of self-government at that time in consequence of the then position of the colony he said that of course we must look forward to self-government as a desirable end which the colony must attain. I may say therefore that the whole people of the colony from the first have always had this idea of governing themselves in their mind and the only question with them has been as to the time when they should take upon themselves the burden of self-government. Of course some years ago and even perhaps within the last four or five years there have been times when the delays consequent upon negotiations with the Colonial Office have acted somewhat prejudicially in our local affairs and this has created perhaps some ill feeling; but so far as the Colonial Office is concerned I believe that the idea has been always to allow us within all reasonable limits to do what we deemed proper and right in the management of our affairs. Then again another reason which has operated in the minds of the people is that during the last few years there has been a considerable influx of people particularly artizans from the neighbouring colonies and those people have exclaimed against what they call the Crown Colony Government. There have been agitators who have pointed out that it was a one-man government meaning that the Governor was virtually the government. The people have been aroused and their feelings a good deal inflamed by the opinions of these men from the neighbouring colonies and no doubt sentiment has had a great deal to do with the unanimous feeling which there now is in favour of the new constitution. Then again the idea has always been sown broadcast amongst the people that the birthright of every Englishman is to govern himself; and however much we may be satisfied with or may progress under the present constitution feeling this desire to be placed on a par with other Englishmen in other colonies of course operates very strongly in the minds of the people at large. Again we have been told rightly or wrongly by many persons in other colonies that as soon as we have self-government they would introduce capital into our colony and many persons have declared even to myself when I have been on visits to the neighbouring colonies that they would not dream of coming to a Crown colony. [333] Of course that has been published in the papers and it has had great effect; it has been pointed out how we are being retarded by the fact of our being a Crown colony.  But you are not a Crown colony; you have representative government? - We are not a Crown colony; but you cannot pursuade people who are not acquainted with our constitution that we are not a Crown colony. They say the Governor is virtually the government and although we have a Legislature the Legislature is derided because while we have constantly an opposition which is double the number of the government yet the government is permanent. Even in England we know that a government after time becomes unpopular; and I presume it is in consequence of a government after it has held office thus becoming unpopular that we have the various changes of government that take place here. You Will of course see that where a permanent government exists it is still more likely to become unpopular. When there is no chance of ousting a government it is unpopular almost from the first and as years roll on it becomes still more unpopular and everyone who is not concerned in the government imagines that he could do very much better if he had charge of public affairs. When we have self-government I imagine that we shall be able to act very much more expeditiously in relation to our affairs and that it will be a great benefit to the colony It will I think induce a considerable influx of capital which capital must employ labour; and necessarily Western Australia will become a much better field than it is at present for more immigrants. (I am using the word "immigrants" now as distinguished from the colonists.) We shall undoubtedly do a great deal with the view of opening up our gold-fields and extending our railways with a view to settlement. This will necessitate the borrowing of money and the employment of a great deal of labour; and immigrants must be imported to supply this labour for the purpose of carrying out these works and we hope that a great many of them will Settle upon the soil. I may say also that one thing which has perhaps operated rather prejudicially so far as this constitution is concerned is that in some instances I think the Colonial Office in making appointments to the colony have not studied the interests of the colony and of the colonists as much as they perhaps ought to have done.  What appointments do you refer to? - I would rather not name any particular instance.  You are speaking generally? - Yes I am speaking generally but there is no doubt about it that consideration has operated in the minds of some people. I could go further and say that I think that some of these appointments have had a very ill effect upon the colony; we have had men who are quite unfitted for their posts. [334] I may also say that this question of responsible government has been agitated in the Legislature ever since 1878; it has been brought up every year year after year; and gradually the minority increased until it became a majority and eventually all the Members of the House were unanimous upon the subject. As something has been said with regard to the petition which was sent home by Mr. Padbury I may say that Mr. Padbury himself before I left the colony told me that notwithstanding his having signed and sent home that petition he himself now was of opinion that the best thing for the colony was responsible government and the sooner the better. The unanimity of the electors with regard to the point is shown by this fact; that at the last general election when this question as to whether we should have responsible government or not was referred to the country in not one single constituency was there a candidate who advocated the retention of the present constitution. I should imagine that no stronger fact as showing the feeling of the country could be adduced than that. In July 1887 we passed those resolutions in favour of self-government and from that time with the exception of a small loan of £100000 the Colonial Office have not allowed us to borrow any money. The line taken by the Colonial Office was that while this question was under consideration it would be better for the colony not to incur further liability but to allow the new government under the new constitution to borrow what money it pleased and not to hamper it by any further loans. 'That is I think what Sir Thomas Campbell referred to; but it will be observed that the line was not taken by the Colonial Office till after we had passed the resolutions in the House in favour of the change. Speaking for myself I do not blame the Colonial Office in any way. I cannot help thinking that if I had been one of the permanent officials of the Colonial Office I should have adopted exactly the same course; and I think it will be found that the future ministry under self-government will he rather grateful to the Colonial Office for having adopted that line.  The Chairman in opening the meeting said: - Gentlemen - You have been invited here this afternoon by the Employers' Union and Steamship Owners' Association to consider the very serious labor difficulties that have occurred not only in this colony but all over Australia.  Mr. HENRY HUDSON (President of the New South Wales Employers' Union) was called on to move the first resolution and was received with loud cheers. He said: - Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen - The resolution I am asked to propose is as follows: - That the time has arrived when it is absolutely necessary for all employers of labour capitalists and others directly and indirectly interested to form themselves into an association for mutual defence and protection.  (Loud cheers.) In moving this resolution I thoroughly endorse everything said by the Chairman in introducing the object of this meeting. [261] I am not one to make rash assertions or to rush into what may be called a stand-up fight but I think the time has arrived when it is absolutely necessary for us to do something to define the respective positions of employers and men. (Cheers). I am sure I am justified in saying that as far as the employers are concerned the present trouble is none of their seeking. (Hear hear.) The present crisis is most unjustifiable and has been brought about entirely by the action of the labour bodies - there can be no question about that. (Hear hear.) .. . We should put ourselves in order that we may devise some means of meeting this trouble and hence I ask you to pass the motion now before the meeting.  Mr. THOMAS BUCKLAND (President of the Bank of New South Wales) who was called upon to second the resolution was greeted with loud cheers. He said: - Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen - I must crave your indulgence for I am but a poor speaker but having been resident in Sydney for close on sixty years I may be able to give you some good reminiscences of what was the position of employer and labourer half a century ago and up to within a very few years of the present time as compared with the existing state of affairs. In days gone by if a man was conducting a profitable business and went to the capitalist to borrow money the first thing he did was to display his assets and then describe the nature of his business. The capitalist would say well your assets are worth say £10000 but you have a good going business and we will advance you money to the full extent of your assets and also something on the prospects of your business. (Cheers.) What is the position now? If a manufacturer has £10000 worth of solid assets in the shape of land and say £50000 invested in machinery and goes to the capitalist to borrow money what sort of a reception does he get? Why he finds that he can get an advance to the full value of his land perhaps but the capitalist will not give him a shilling on his machinery or trade assets. (Cheers.) The capitalist knows well enough that any day a strike may occur and render the whole of the manufacturer's property with the exception of the land utterly valueless. (Cheers.) .. . I employ a considerable number of people in the country in connection with the growth of stock. I pay rent to the Government for land and assist to grow wool which I send to Sydney to ship or sell and I say the Government are bound to see me unharmed. (Loud cheers.)  Mr. JAMES BURNS (Messrs. Burns Philp & Co.) who was asked to support the resolution rose amidst cheers and said: - In supporting the resolution which has been so ably put before you I must emphatically deny that the Steamship Owners' Association have in any way sought the present trouble. (Cheers.) .. . We hear a great deal about "Capital and Labor" but this does not properly describe the parties who are at present in conflict. (Cheers.) There is as much capital on one side as the other. (Hear hear.) The present conflict is really one between dictation on the part of the employees and reason on the part of the employers. (Cheers.) We have been dictated to by the labor bodies on every point until our business has been taken entirely out of our control. (Hear hear.) In talking about "Capital and Labor" the labor bodies seem to think that they have a great majority on their side but that is not correct. I have gone into this matter with care and I find from the returns of the shareholders of the various shipping companies that nine companies out of thirty-four have nearly 4000 shareholders the exact figures being 3759. [262] Now if the other companies have similar numbers of shareholders there must be between 10000 and 12000 shareholders with capital invested in shipping and represented in the Steamship Owners' Association. If we take in addition our employees (our clerical staffs) we have fully 12000 people who are interested with the members of the Steamship Owners' Association. (Cheers.) I need not take up your time by going into further matters of detail but I simply wished to remove the false impression existing as to the relative positions of so-called "Capital and Labor." There is no such thing as "Capital" in the sense in which the term has been used by the labor leaders. (Cheers.) A large number of the shareholders in the coastal steam shipping companies are working men settlers and others who have invested their money in the shares of the steamship companies. (Cheers.) In the Tasmanian S.N. [Steam Navigation] Company there are not less than 800 shareholders a large number of these being ladies in Tasmania who are dependent upon their dividends for their bread. (Hear hear.) These are the "Capitalists" who are supposed to be crushing out labor at this moment. (Cheers.) ... Unionism in a moderate degree is a good thing but when it becomes aggressive I might almost say pestilential it is the duty of all men even the workers themselves to stop it. (Cheers.)  Mr. A.W. MEEKS (Gibbs Bright & Co.) Vice-President of the New South Wales Employers' Union was entrusted with the third resolution and was greeted with loud cheers. He said: - Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen - The resolution I have to submit to you is as follows: - That it is desirable that all employers not members of the Employers'  Union should at once join that Union to ensure united action. This meeting calls on all persons directly and indirectly interested to express their sympathy in a practical manner by recognising that the shipowners and others connected with maritime labour are fighting the battles of the community against aggressive unionism and agrees to subscribe to a fund to assist them.  Some two years ago a meeting was called in Sydney to inaugurate an Employers' Union. I had the pleasure then although not long in this Colony of supporting a resolution recommending that an Employers' Union should be formed in this city. That Employers' Union was formed and has been in existence since but without some crisis such as the present to force them to the front employers are often inclined to hold back as they do not see the necessity for action which others who have been in the conflict have had fully brought home to them. Therefore the Employers' Union has not been such a generally recognised institution in this land as it ought to have been. (Cheers.) Nevertheless it has done an immense amount of good. (Hear hear.) The Employers' Union was not started as a fighting institution but a large number of people here saw as had been previously recognised in Adelaide and Melbourne the necessity for combination. ... The Employers' Union has been of some assistance in the past because whereas in years gone by the Unions would have thrown their rules down and insisted upon the employers adopting them literally they now come to ask us if we are prepared to adopt them. Conferences have been held which show that the labour organisations recognise the Employers' Union as a certain power and what we seek now is to make that power something more than it is to-day. (Cheers.) We want every person who is engaged in business everyone who has a stake in this country to come forward and join our ranks and so this resolution affirms that every employer not at present a member of the Employers' Union should join it at once. [263] (Hear hear.) I am glad to say that during the past few days we have had very valuable accessions to our ranks. Some of the largest houses in the city have joined us and are working heartily with us. (Cheers.) When we have got a flourishing institution round which we can rally the Trades and Labour Council will find itself confronted by a thousand or more men engaged in business who are prepared to stand up and protect that which belongs to them. (Cheers.) We have expressed sympathy with those who are engaged as employers in the present conflict and this sympathy must take the form of something more than a formal resolution. We must have funds to carry on the work. (Cheers.) The action taken by the labour bodies recently has been aggressive in the extreme because the strike has not been confined to those who have real or supposed grievances but 'has been extended to those who have no possible grounds for complaint. The wharf labourers for instance have decided on a certain course and have stopped work all round broken their agreement and joining those who have come out on strike have brought the whole trade of the port to a standstill. Now is the proper time for claiming that freedom of contract to which every man is entitled but which has been denied us by the labour bodies. (Cheers.)  ACT ONE  THE SHADOW ON THE THRESHOLD  "Some unborn sorrow ripe in Fortune's womb  Is coming towards me"  Shakespeare (Richard II [II 2 10-11])  SCENE: THE HUT IN THE RANGES. EARLY MORNING  Bush scene: House set L (bark hut). Fence (rustic) across stage at back with gate or sliprails C. Tree clump R. C. Trees saplings &c about stage. Cowshed R.U.E.  (Music for curtain. Lights full up. Limelights. Papers in Act I: Newspaper for George Warrant for GORING.)  NORAH MARSTON discovered seated at hut door  Enter JIM MARSTON R. C. with axe on shoulder.  Note: "Jim - 6 feet 1 inch dark hair and eyes. He was a careless happy-go-lucky chap always in a good temper always jolly always ready to laugh or chaff or go on with tricks like a monkey. "  Boldrewood [Ch. XX VIII]  NORAH: Jim!  JIM: (R. C.) Well mother. (Jolly smile on face)  NORAH: When are you going to work?  JIM: Ain't I going to work now?  NORAH: I mean to work reg'lar for your livin' like George Storefield.  JIM: (Laughing) Oh George? He never sees any life. He's just like an old poley bullock that walks up to the yoke in the morning and never stops hauling till he's let go at night. This is a free country and I don't think a fellow was born for that sort of thing and nothing else.  (Cattle Bell heard)  NORAH: This country's like any other country. A man must work and save when he's young if he doesn't want to be a beggar and starve when he's old. [6]  JIM: But a man must have a little fun while he's young. .  NORAH: Just what DICK says. Oh you're a fine pair. What one says the other swears to. You ought to have been twins.  JIM: (Laughing heartily) Not my fault we weren't.  NORAH: Go along with you.  (Cattle bell)  NORAH: (Jumping up and looking off R) Ah there's one of them cows. She'll be in the garden. (Jim laughs) Ah it's no laughing matter. So mind and see that the gate's fast then get some water from the creek and chop some wood.  JIM: Oh I'm wood and water - Joey I am. (Going)  (Lively music till GEORGE and DICK on)  (Enter GEORGE STOREFIELD R on horseback)  (Enter DICK MARSTON following)  GEORGE: (Dismounting and tying horse to fence) Ah lads I'm afraid we're going to have a dry season.  DICK: I think you're right George. We haven't had any rain to speak of for a couple of months and that bit of wheat of ours is beginning to go back. The oats look better. (Unsaddling GEORGE'S horse)  JIM: Bill Dawson came in from outside yesterday and he says things are shocking bad: all the frontage bare and the water drying up.  (Places saddle on stage and exits with horse in stable)  DICK: (Sullenly) It's always the way as soon as a poor man's got a chance of a decent crop the season turns against him or prices go down so that he never gets a chance.  GEORGE: It's as bad for the rich man isn't it? It's God's will and we can't make or mend matters by complaining.  DICK: (Sullenly) But it's not as bad for the rich man. Even if the squatters suffer by a drought and lose their stock they've more stock and money in the bank or else credit to fall back on; while the like of us lose all we have in the world and no one would lend us a pound to save our lives.  GEORGE: It's not quite so bad as that. I shall lose my year's work and most of the cattle and horses besides unless rain comes but I shall be able to get a few pounds to go on with however the season goes. [7]  DICK: Oh if you like to bow and scrape to rich people well and good but that's not my way. We have as good a right to our share of the land as they have.  (Re-enter JIM)  GEORGE: If we pay for the land as they do certainly.  DICK: But why should we pay? The Almighty made the land and the people too one to live on the other. Why should we pay for our own? I believe in getting my share somehow.  GEORGE: That's a sort of argument that doesn't come out right. How would you like another man to come and want to halve the farm with you.  DICK: I shouldn't mind. I should go halves with someone who had a bigger one.  JIM: (Laughs) My colonial.  DICK: More money too more horses more sheep a bigger house. Why should he have it and not me.  GEORGE: That's a lazy man's argument not an honest man's.  NORAH: You're a naughty boy   DICK. Isn't he Jim?  JIM: But he doesn't mean all he says and very likely we'll have lots of rain after all. (DICK and JIM are going off R.U.E. when NORAH calls after them)  NORAH: Small wood mind Jim.  JIM: All right mother! (Exit JIM R.U.E.)  (Music)  AILEEN: (Off L.U.E. with pail of milk) Hi DICK.  (Then with the high pitched Australian cry) Coo-ee-e!  DICK: Coo-ee! What is it?  AILEEN: Let out those milkers.  DICK: Allright Aileen. (Exit DICK R.U.E.) (Music swells)  (Enter AILEEN L.U.E. (Not seeing GEORGE who is down R.)  AILEEN: Such a splendid pailful. Daisy gives eight quarts now. Here you are mother. Porridge this morning you know. (Music stops) [8]  NORAH: (Taking milk) You are a good girl Aileen. I wish your brothers were like you.  AILEEN: Don't you say a word against my brothers mother. They're the best and bravest and handsomest brothers any girl ever had. Real currency lads and I'm a currency lass; and proud of it.  NORAH: Ah! There's no holdin' the cornstalks.  (Exit NORAH to house L. with milk)  AILEEN: No holding the cornstalks. Of course there isn't. They grow and grow and as long as they grow straight they're allright never Fret. (Cattle bell and noise of' whip cracking)  JIM: (Outside) Whoa - Molly. Steady there Buttercup.  AILEEN: Why there's George Storefield. (Runs to him) Oh George I'm so glad to see you. (Shakes hands) You're just in time to put a set on the breakfast.  GEORGE: (R. C. Shaking hands) Aileen! All well? (Aileen nods) That's right . Where's Grace?  AILEEN: (L.C.) Grace? She's in the dairy.  GEORGE: I've come for her.  AILEEN: Oh that's too bad. She's only been here a week and we're such mates.  GEORGE: I really can't get on any longer without her.  AILEEN: I thought your were a don at bachelor management.  GEORGE: I might have been before Grace came home for good but now I see how necessary it is for a house to have a good woman for its mistress. Ah! Aileen.  AILEEN: Well Mr Longface?  GEORGE: If you would consent to be that mistress.  AILEEN: And turn out Grace?  GEORGE: (Turning hat round nervously in hands) Think it over! There's live hundred sheep three cows seven horses two carts and a wagon. And then there's the selection. One thousand acres conditional purchase with a creek running right through. Well cleared and the main part fenced and Grace loves you as a sister and I - I love you.  AILEEN: As a brother.  GEORGE: No Aileen not as a brother as a - as a -   AILEEN: (Laughing) Oh George how awfully funny you do look. [9]  GEORGE: You do not love me. Better say it at once I can bear it.  AILEEN: You'll have to Mr Broadback. There! (Putting her hand in his) Let it be brother George and sister Aileen.  (Enter GRACE)  GRACE: And sister Grace. (Arm round AILEEN) Always sister Grace. (Crosses right and sits on tree stump) Well George what's the news? I'm sure you must have plenty.  GEORGE: No. I'm no gossip-monger. The only time I feel inclined to yarn is round the camp fire and then I generally fall asleep in the middle of it.  GRACE: (Laughing) In the middle of the fire?  GEORGE: No - of my story. But here's the Sydney Morning Herald full of all the latest news. Stocks - shares - racing reports - row in the House - bits of scandal - (about to give paper)  GRACE: Thank you. I'm so fond of scandal of course.  GEORGE: I don't mean that - like my stupidity. There's one thing tho' that will interest you both for the whole country's ringing with it.  AILEEN: And pray what is that?  GEORGE: You'll find it in big type like a Government Proclamation. (Half opens paper) Here it is. (Reads) "Robbery under Arms. Another daring outrage by the notorious Starlight and his gang - the Police once more baffled" and so on. (Gives AILEEN paper) There read it. I'd read it for you but Aileen don't care two straws for me.  GRACE: Oh yes she does care a whole haystack for you.  AILEEN (Aside) But not that way.  GEORGE: Ah well. I'll look at the big bay horse your father talks so much about.  (Exit GEORGE L.U.E.)  AILEEN: (Watching him off and then to GRACE) Poor George! There's not a better fellow this Sydney side. (Looking at paper) Oh. This horrid bushranging!  (Enter BEN MARSTON R.U.E. unnoticed by AILEEN)  NOTE: BEN MARSTON - A square-built man - wonderfully strong for his age and quick on his pins. Afraid of nothing. [10]   Hair & beard iron-grey. Wears old pilot-coat he is cutting up tobacco as he enters and fills pipe and lights it during the ensuing dialogue.  AILEEN: (To GRACE) How I hate the very name of it and sometimes I think that father -   BEN: (Beside her) Well what about father?  AILEEN: (Both startled for a moment) Nothing! I was wondering where you were.  BEN: (L.C.) Thought I'd gone on the wallaby again eh?  (AILEEN crosses to BEN puts arm round him and kisses him)  BEN: (Looking round) Home's a jolly place after all. I am going to stay ever so long this time and work like an old near-side poler. See if I don't - Let's look at your hands Eily. (Business) My word you've been doing your share.  GRACE: Indeed she has - it's a shame that it is with two big brothers she has to take an axe in her pretty little hands and cut.  BEN: All that wood over there I'll go bail I nearly broke my neck over it.  AILEEN: How do you know I cut wood - you are always going away no one knows where and when you do come home it's at night - like - like -   BEN: As if I was ashamed of where I'd been. Spit it out if that's what you mean.  AILEEN: I don't mean anything but what's kind and loving you naughty old dad -   BEN: (To Grace) Was your brother here just now?  GRACE: Yes Mr Marston.  (Cattle bell)  BEN: (Suspiciously) Anybody with him?  GRACE: No - no one.  BEN: (Aside) George seems a bit mooney-like lately. Got a lip on him like a motherless foal. He's in love he is. I fancy I know people in love when I sees 'em. (Chuckles) Strange as it may 'pear I was once a fool of that kind myself. (Aloud) What does George want?  AILEEN: He came for Grace.  BEN: Where's Jim and DICK. (Noise of chopping wood R.)  AILEEN : Jim's chopping wood. DICK'S down at the big waterhole trying for fish. [11]  BEN: When will them boys learn to make money?  AILEEN: Soon enough I daresay and honestly too I hope.  BEN: Them make money? Bah!  AILEEN: There's better things than money dad -   BEN: Not in this world.  AILEEN: Bye and bye then. (With afar-off look)  BEN: (Aside) Choppin' wood! Fishin' in the waterhole! When they ought to be fishers of men as the parson cove says.  (Lively music till DICK and JIM on)  AILEEN: (Clapping hands) Ah here they come. (Goes to meet them with GRACE)  (Enter JIM and DICK R.U.E. arm-in-arm lovingly. JIM with axe and bundle of wood. DICK with rod and fish.)  DICK: Here Aileen take these to mother. They're just in time for breakfast.  "I am utterly opposed to this nonsensical idea of giving women votes" said one of the Members of Parliament commenting on the proposed Electoral Bill. So are we opposed to it if it is nonsensical but as so many reforms and discoveries of incalculable value have at first sight been declared idiotic and absurd we may as well look at the foundation facts and see if this proposed Bill contain the essence of foolishness or whether it does as some claim bring us as near to pure justice and absolute freedom as any human law has yet approached.  We are a community of men and women living in one corner of the globe which we have marked off as our own and since the business of so many people cannot be managed by all we select a hundred and fifty men to make laws for us and manage our public offices. The laws made by these deputies are binding on women as well as men but the women have no advocates or representatives in the Assembly nor any means of making their wishes known. The life and work of every woman is just as essential to the good of the community as that of every man. Her work and the character she bears raise or depress the standard of the state as much as does the life of any individual man; why is she set aside and disabled from expressing her opinion as to what should be done by this community of which she is a member. Why are her rights less than her brothers. She bears a full half of the trouble when the affairs of the state are depressed an unjust law or the lack of law brings to her life care or hardship or injury as it does to men yet none of the deputies ask what she wishes - why should they she has no vote. [346] She belongs to the better behaved sex - for women only contribute one-fifth to the criminal class (four-fifths are men) and it would therefore seem likely that her opinion would be worth having yet she is expressly discouraged from the formation of opinions they are declared ineffectual by the other half of this community of people. It does not seem so nonsensical after all this idea that a woman's opinion as to the fitness of a deputy may be as just and right and worthy of weight as a man's opinion.  Supposing   There are two views of the woman's suffrage question commonly discussed the justice of the measure and its expediency. Few doubt its justice many question its expediency and yet being just what does all else matter?  Suppose that the right to vote lay with women only and that the progress of the world was bringing expansive thoughts and hopes of a happier future into the minds of men. When men perceived that this right was unjustly withheld from them and felt that their individual manhood was title enough to this right to a voice in decisions affecting all would they tolerate discussion as to the expediency or wisdom of the measure. Would they stand by and hear the women conjecture how men might perchance misuse the concession if granted would they quietly wait while political factions summed up the chances of the support of the new voters? No they would say 'Curse you - it is my right. What business is it of yours how I use it?"  Her Proper Sphere  As to expediency the arguments have been so often repeated that it seems foolish to reiterate them especially as nothing cogent is brought forward on the opposing side. In Parliament such old phrases as these were used viz: - that 'woman should be kept in her proper sphere" and "women have duties quite outside the political arena". One would think the political arena consisted of the Parliamentary Refreshment Room they are so sure it is not a desirable place for a woman to be seen in. In the minds of these objectors "politics" seem to consist of the petty animosities and personalities which the law making business now gives rise to but "politics" in reality cover nearly all questions which a thinking man or woman do now consider and form opinions upon. Laws are made upon divorce the sale of liquor factory regulations the employment of children gambling education hours of labour and scores of subjects upon which women do think and respecting which they ought to have the power of giving effect to their wishes by the selection of men representing their shade of opinion. [347] And if women do not also at once enter the "political arena" so far as to care greatly about the land laws and mining acts pray do men voters come to an intelligent decision on every possible subject of legislation before casting a vote? Most men do not seriously consider and decide in their own minds upon more than two or three of the many subjects which come within the wide circle of "politics" and it would not therefore take women long to reach equality in that respect. We are inclined to believe that a woman can form as good an idea as to the best man among Parliamentary candidates as the average man voter.  More Logic  But say some people women do not want the vote most of them would not use it if they had it. What will happen after they have the vote may be left to the prophets to say but if A and B do not want something is that a reason why C who has a just claim should be denied?  Prematurity  In the debate Mr Traill who said he was in favour of woman's suffrage urged that the measure would be premature; that women should be first educated to the use of a vote by possessing the suffrage under a Local Government Act. "Then" said he "if found to be using it well they should be permitted to influence Imperial questions."  This would be kind indeed but this is not the method hitherto employed when new classes have been admitted to the franchise. We have not first put them through political schools; we have taken the raw material and under the influence of its new liberty and swayed by the responsibilities of its new standing the raw material has developed but where has any government ever had raw material so certain to act conscientiously so prepared already with intelligence and with a strong bias towards moderation peace steady reform and moral purgation? Probably it is because they know that with women voting the men of bad character would have little chance of future election that makes men so fearful that women "might not use it well".  Women Members  Many of the speakers in the House contended that if women received the right to vote they should also logically have the right to sit in Parliament. This is not asked for and need not at present be decided. Few women would care for such a post but it may be safely said that if exceptional women spring up such as the world has hitherto had some examples of they could not fail to raise the tone of the House and fill a place worthily. [348] It is to be remembered that men will not cease to vote when women have the suffrage and that women are decidedly critical of their own sex. She would need to be a remarkable woman who could win the confidence of a mixed constituency of men and women. A young married woman is the usual illustration taken to show the absurdity of a Woman Member and a woeful picture is drawn of her deserted babies and dinnerless husband but these pictures only show the speaker's ignorance of women for there is no woman who would not think of her baby and the happiness of her home long before she desired in her wildest fancies the barren honour of a Parliamentary seat. She would not be likely to be asked to stand and she would not consent if asked.  Some members treated the question in the old semi-facetious way conjecturing the effect of pretty women in Parliament and the power of a lovely woman Premier to win susceptible opposition members to her side. This presupposes that the political convictions of men are but wavering undecided beliefs and easily unseated and forgets this fact that a woman of such attainments and character that a mixed constituency of men and women esteemed her a fit Parliamentary representative would by her very nature her modesty and quiet sense make this silly gallantry impossible and she would so scorn adherents won only by beauty that they would probably begin under her influence to form their opinions firmly and honestly. Another member alleged that his brother members would do no work if ladies sat beside them. If men are indeed so silly that in a place of business they must inevitably be simpering to women it will not be so nonsensical to give a vote to a class undoubtedly not prone to publicly exhibit their weakness or their foolishness.  METHOD 1890-91  No one who is [sic] the habit of reading any of the many journals devoted to the interests of women can have failed to be struck by the cry of overwork and overpressure which goes up from the hearts of women. From all parts in varying accents and in different words but with ever the same sad refrain comes the cry "My burden is greater than I can bear; the ceaseless hurry and turmoil of my life is crushing me." And the pathetic part of it is that this is no complaint of idle lazy women but the expression of house mothers workers leaders in great and good works whose energies are spent for the good of their families and of humanity at large and who only desire that their burden may be lightened that they may do their work more faithfully. The cry goes up not alone from the poorer classes it is echoed by women in every rank through the length and breadth of the whole continent. That there is overpressure is sadly and abundantly proved by the increasing numbers of women who are incapacitated by diseases of the nervous system or who swell the roll of those poor souls who find an asylum within the walls of our hospitals for the insane. [349] Mr Bellamy has done what he could to stem the rising tide of household difficulties or rather to abate the flood which threatens to overwhelm so many homes but women must understand that the real remedy lies with themselves.  Greater simplicity of life dress food and surrounding would at once mitigate if not abolish the evil and we may be very sure that men will not raise any strong objections if we lead the way. Indeed there are many who will welcome gladly the emancipation of their women-folk and if we are honest with ourselves we shall at once own that most men prefer simplicity in dress and that whatever may have been our reason for sitting up late with aching back and eyes to put those two frills on little Irene's skirt or goffer our own flounces it was certainly not to please the good man who though he likes his wife and children to look well dressed is always on the side of plainness. So long as we all strive to live in the same style and to present the same appearance as our wealthier neighbours so long will the house-mother have a tired face and a sharp or a weary tone in her voice and the house-father but a small bank account. However as we cannot hope to hew down and root out in a few days or weeks the Upas tree of vain competition which has so long been growing in our midst it may not be amiss to offer here a few suggestions which may prove useful to the overworked who see no way to lessen their labours.  After all it is not the physical weakness which is the hardest to bear but the constant strain on the memory that nothing shall be omitted and the continual attempt to do and think of two things at the same time. And here my suggestions may prove helpful. To ease the overburdened memory try this simple plan; carry always in your pocket a small notebook and pencil and write down anything you want to remember to do immediately you think of it instead of turning your ring or tying a knot in your handkerchief or asking someone to remind you of it. Every morning as you dress have your little notebook open on the toilet-table and see what are the things to be done that day; like a wise general plan your campaign before starting for the day's march. Train yourself to look in the little book when you have a few spare minutes that you may see what is the most urgent duty.  Be sure to put down everything you wish to remember letters to be written visits to be made little jobs of needlework or about the house matters about which you wish to consult your husbands orders for your servants and trade-people. Notes of invitation etc. should always when possible be answered at once so they will not need to be entered in your book. [350]  No woman with a bad memory who has not tried the notebook system can imagine the satisfaction it gives to run one's pencil through some line in the book and think comfortably "That is done and finished with." I do not propose the notebook as a panacea for all the troubles of overworked women but it will certainly ease their labours to do their work more systematically. We should do well to lay to heart the precept of old George Herbert whose wise and godly poems are not read half so much as they deserve to be "Sum up at night the things that thou hast done and in the morning what thou has to do."  If you have servants write down on a slate the menu for the day it helps them to remember and there can be no mistake. If you have no servant still write out the menu and look at it as you prepare the meals that you may have the things planned. It is well in a spare half-hour to gather together all one's cookery books and plan out the meals for a week; they can be modified afterwards to suit the contents of the larder and it simplifies the marketing and reduces the butcher's bill: there are so many inexpensive little dishes that are a welcome change from joints chops and steak but the existence of which one is apt to forget unless reminded by the cookery book.  If you have many garments to repair and not much time to devote to them try the plan of giving one hour to preparing your work - matching materials from your piece-drawer tacking on patches cutting out setting tucks etc. then fold the prepared work neatly away to be taken up at any moment when chatting with a friend when your husband is ready to read aloud to you in the evening or when you have a few minutes to spare. Much can be accomplished thus when it would be out of the question to devote the time and attention requisite for fixing the work. Look carefully over all linen which comes from the laundress and put aside all that requires mending remember that the stitch in time neglected for one week often means two or three hundred the next.  Procrastination is not only as we learned in our copy-book "the thief of time" it is also a chief factor in the sum of weariness which oppresses many women. The writer having a natural tendency to that failing knows from experience that the letter which should have been written and was not the visit which was neglected in the proper time tire one far more than letters written and visits paid. Here is one advantage of the notebook it will not let one forget and shames one into doing one's duty.  I desire to be very distinctly understood on the character and principles of a piece of legislation of this kind. I hold that the duty of the legislature is to take every precaution which wisdom and humanity can dictate to preserve the health to protect the lives of and afford the amplest security to men working in coal-mines. [610] I recognise the exceptional danger of the avocation and this bill was introduced with the twofold object of giving all fair guarantee to men possessed of capital in their investments and at the same time of preserving the rights and the health of the persons employed in the coal-mines. The principle of eight hours was introduced in the peculiar way which I have named. Now with regard to the apportionment of time in the lives of men who labour I cannot be suspected of being an enemy to the eight hours system for I was the first man of any position whatever in this country who advocated eight hours as a day's labour. [...] I say here what I have said many a time and often that civilisation itself would lose its charm and its value to me if it as it went on did not lighten the burden of those who labour if it did not lighten the burden of the masses of humanity. I trust the time will come when in the progress of enlightenment the necessity for toil will be greatly reduced. I can see no satisfactory object in the ordinary course of moral development if that does not come about. But I distinguished very broadly between eight hours being sufficient for a man to labour and Parliament presuming to say how many hours he shall labour. The economic question of how long a man shall labour in the twenty-four hours disappears from my mind when you conjure up some power of Parliament which I deny exists to fix the hours of a man's labour. If that creature endowed with divine capacity a human being who we are told on the highest authority was created in the image of God himself has any right in the whole world it is the right to dispose of his own life so long as he injures no other human being. I deny that any human institution such as Parliament has the moral power to limit the time he thinks well to labour. It seems to me that the question of what is a sufficient period for toil disappears altogether and another question arises whether Parliament has the right to say to a man "You shall labour eight hours but no longer"? If it has that right it has the right to say "You shall labour eighteen hours." The question is not whether eight hours or ten hours shall be a day's labour but whether Parliament has the right to say to a human creature - a creature endowed with the divine capacity for reason - "You shall work for a given number of hours." If you once establish that you establish not the eight hours system but the right of Parliament to fix ten hours twelve hours fourteen hours or any number of hours as a day's labour. It is because I feel that is an act of tyranny - which I deny that any Parliament in the world has the moral right to carry - that I am opposed to legislation to fix the hours of labour. Nor is it wanted. The working-classes of this country are sufficiently strong to make good - indeed they have made good - their will to work eight hours without asking Parliament to prostitute itself to exercise the power which in all moral justice it does not possess to say how many hours a man endowed with reason infused with that divine element called life is to labour. [611] The true freedom of a man is to dispose of his time and of this life as best consults his own convenience and to violate that freedom is an act of tyranny - a parliament may do it but a parliament has often done most wicked and abominable things and it cannot do this thing without violating the laws of God which made man absolutely free to do the best he can for himself. Hence then while I would go with the workers - that is with the masses of my fellow human creatures - to lighten their burden to the utmost of my power by all moral means and while I contend that moral means are sufficient I deny the right of any parliament under the sun to fix the hours of labour. Now I come to this bill. On my sick bed when I could not leave it I remonstrated with my colleague at what was then done and I told him the other evening that we could not go beyond what had been done. I explained to him that it was quite justifiable to limit the hours of labour to prevent injury to growing youth. I agree to that entirely.  Mr. J. D. FITZGERALD: Interfering with liberty again!  Sir HENRY PARKES: Unless I can have a fair hearing I cannot proceed with my remarks. My voice is not so strong as formerly; my strength is not so great as it was even two years ago and I do not like senseless interruptions. I am trying to state as clearly as I can what my views really are. I entirely concur in limiting the hours of labour in the case of growing youth. It is necessary to prevent injury to their health. The community has an interest in the sound growth of the rising generation. It is desirable that every child should become a healthy and strong man or woman and for the sake of society as well as of individuals the principle of the English Factories Act is perfectly justified. I go further than that: I am willing to limit the hours of labour for adults who have to work in an atmosphere inimical to health. I entirely concur in that; but I draw the widest possible distinction between that and statutory regulation as to how a hale ordinary man should dispose of his time under the ordinary circumstances of society.  These principles live for ever and one of those principles is the inalienable freedom of every human being who is brought into this world and any one who makes an assault upon this individual freedom whether he knows it or not is in his heart and soul in all essential respects as great a tyrant as the Emperor Nero. Tyranny is an arbitrary interference with your fellow-men - the compelling your fellow-men to do a thing which their honest reason and just judgment tells them they ought not to do; and whether it is in the guise of a trades-union or the edict of an autocrat - Say the autocrat of all the Russians - it is tyranny just the same in all its elements. [612] And freedom is the power uninterfered with by anybody untouched by anybody protected by honest laws for every man born into a free state to do what he thinks best for his own individual advancement and the advancement of his fellows.  You consider that Union men are justified in refusing to work with non-Unionists? Yes certainly.  And is a principle of Unionism involved in that rule? Experience has shown that non-Unionists are used as elements of destruction.  Have not Trades Unionists in England worked side by side with non-Unionists for very many years? Some of them do it still and So do some of ours but it is done to protect their lives and is justified under those conditions. In our case all our means are used to induce a man to join the Union such as interviewing him at his own home and persuading him and at last it comes to the period when only one man will be left out perhaps. In one case only one man out of 1400 was not a Unionist and had set his face against it. We always find that this is a class of men who will take any benefit so long as they have not to pay for it. In my own district the managers will not allow any man to work unless he joins the Union and the captains of shifts have orders to discharge any man who refuses to join.  If the managers do that that supersedes your compulsion? Al together.  But you still exercised compulsion in the first place to induce the managers to take this stand? We do not look upon it as compulsion to ask a man to join our Union. We do not compel men to join at all but their not joining sometimes cannot be left unnoticed. As an instance sixty men were working at a certain mine and one man refused to pay a levy of 2s. The other men at once took up their clothes and said they were going home. The captain of the shift asked them what they were going away for and they said there was a man who would not pay the levy. They proposed sacrificing their places but as the manager was not going to have his mine stopped he gave way to their wishes; he was not going to let fifty-nine men go for the sake of one who would stay.  Was not that compulsion? No; there was no compulsion. The Union men were ready to sacrifice their positions and the other man could stay on.  But you made the manager use compulsion? No; we are always prepared to sacrifice something in support of our principles. If our rules say we are not to work with non-Union men we will go away and leave the field clear. Our experience just now is that they can try as they like but they cannot get men to put on the mines in Victoria. [...] I can justify our refusal to work with non-Unionists on other grounds.  What are they? We are justified on the ground that the rules of a community which are followed by a majority are recognised as the origin of our laws. [755] These customs or practices guide magistrates in their decisions in court in cases where the law itself is not explicit. The community does not allow anyone to avoid taxation because it is the law and we are justified in using compulsion when the desires of the community are known and in the absence of any specific law on the part of the State as it is the community which makes the law.  But a Trades Union is not the whole community? It is the whole in this way - that it represents the whole of that particular branch of occupation which may be under consideration at the moment.  But there is a great difference between State control and voluntary control? There is no such thing as freedom for men to do as they like if by their conduct they injure others. We have to take men as we find them - for example that man who opposed 1400 others. The effect of his holding aloof was that he was allowed to exist for a very long time without paying to the funds of the Union but the officials at last had to deal with the fact that this man was beginning to spread disunion amongst the rest. One would say "Oh so and so does not pay why should I?" and you would be surprised how quick that feeling spreads. Therefore to prevent the spread of disunion you are bound to treat all alike. Another ground is increased wages. We find in one branch of our Association through the establishment of the Union that men have received benefits including increased wages to the amount of £142701. They have as a matter of fact received over £100 per man more than they would have had had there been no Union. We say "Why should men who are discontented and refuse to pay not be dealt with?" and so we find we are compelled to deal with them in order to prevent the Union from going to pieces.  That is a very good argument as to preventing the Union going to pieces but is it any explanation of the function .of the State? The State is bound by practice where there is not an explicit law on any particular subject. Unions are recognised and the practices that are followed are the custom. The same thing happens in commercial life and although it may not be in the organised way in which Unions work the principles are the same.  Then do I understand you to argue that any Trades Union has the right to establish a custom introducing class interest and then that this custom shall be recognised as law? I do provided there is a very large majority. I do not agree that a bare majority should recognise that there is a rule but when the minority is narrowed down to a very few men then those men should not be allowed to share in benefits they do not contribute to. Take Creswick for example. Every man going there knows the rules of the district before he reaches the place; and if any man comes who does not agree to the rules of the district it is not fair that he should be allowed to upset the whole of the rules of that district because he wants to save a paltry 6d. a week. [756] My experience is that there are men mean enough to save the paltry 6d. but do not object to the benefits.  You speak of these men who oppose Unions as men wanting to get benefits at other people's expense but cannot you imagine that men might have very good reasons for not being connected with Unions ; - they might not care about being dragged into strikes for instance? I do not find men dragged into strikes against their will.  Strikes are the act of the whole Union? Yes; and my experience has been that the executives have been a strong restraining influence on the men. This has occurred over and over again. We have sometimes too positively refused to give strike-pay if men persisted in going on strike. They have possibly 500 men arrayed against them who pass a resolution in the face of the determination to strike.  Don't you know that in the Northern mines the minority against a strike has been a very large one and yet there has been a strike? In some cases. There is a great mistake generally current that it is the leaders who precipitate strikes. That is altogether a mistake; they usually are a restraining influence but the men get carried away by excitement. I am a believer that in any large organisation a central council exercises a checking influence because men sometimes decide very hastily and in such cases it requires some power that has authority to make them take more time over their actions. I am a believer in going slow and taking time enough to look at these matters calmly.  Then how came you to have had so many strikes? Several employers were opposed to the principle of Unionism and as an instance one of these cases lasted ten weeks.  What sort of a case was it? It was a lock-out. As soon as the men attempted to form a branch of the Miners' Association the owners posted up a notice that any man who joined would be at once dismissed. That was the common experience ten years ago but after fighting for a time we would explain our object and harmonious relations followed afterwards.  In all these cases where there have been strikes have there been harmonious relations afterwards? Yes; even at Kaitangata where the men were practically beaten because we were not near enough to take charge at the time. [...] We have now 25000 members.  All these strikes you have enumerated have been authorised? Some of them were not at first but afterwards we recognised them. In some cases we have refused assistance where strikes have been threatened as we did not consider there was sufficient cause for the men to go out. Our object when we take up a case is that it shall be of such a character as will warrant the payment of the per week strike pay. In one case at Kadina we refused to consent to strike pay and they lost £480 because we did not approve of their hasty action. By way of contrast taking an approximation for this last year as I have not been able to get the exact official figures yet I venture to say that the approximation is correct we show that during the same period we have paid in accident and relief £70285 3s. 2d.; from the funeral fund £14010. 4d.;in donations assistance to members and deserving widows £16334 ifs. 11 d. making a total of £100630 6s. 5d. These are actual benefits that have been paid within the organisation leaving out the Newcastle strike. Some portion of this £16000 in donations has gone to the assistance of other Unions that have been on strike but only a small portion of it.  Would £10000 cover the whole of the money so spent? Not in addition to the £100000. It covers altogether eighteen years but the Association has only been anything like strong for this last eleven years. Previous to that it only numbered some 200 or 300 members. That would be about 1880 so that it has grown since then.  What is the average contribution of each miner? Sixpence per week and 3s. per annum to the funeral fund.  And something extra in strike time? Strike pay is paid by levy and not out of the general fund. We claim that that has a checking influence on readiness to strike. The executive will naturally be very careful before entering on a strike as they have to find the sinews of war. Members would not like to pay levies for trivial matters and if they had to it would create disunion. [760]  But you mean to say by that that in every one of these strikes you have had a ballot of members? No; the representative of each branch generally gauges the feelings of his branch.  But you do something that enables you to get at more or less the opinions of the people you represent? Yes; the matter is discussed.  Is there any one of these strikes the people have disapproved of? None but the one I mentioned and we rather blamed the men who were locally concerned; but other strikes were unavoidable under the circumstances. Some might have been avoided perhaps by a little better management on the part of the branches. In 1886 we took a further step in Victoria by appointing a joint Committee of miners and asked the Mine-owners' Association to appoint a General Committee seven of their men to meet seven of ours. They did so and since then we meet together when occasion requires that anything has to be dealt with in connection with mining and if any matters have to be laid before the Minister of Mines the two bodies go jointly and see him. This has largely tended to make the two bodies work harmoniously.  How much strike pay have you levied during the year?  £6614 8s. 2d. is all we have paid in eighteen years. I generalised this information from lists carefully obtained from the various branches.  How have all these strikes turned out? Successfully with the exception of the one in New Zealand already mentioned.  Out of twenty-nine strikes - three for shorter hours two against the introduction of Chinese thirteen resisting the reduction of wages and the others - there has been only one in which the conclusion has been adverse to the Amalgamated Miners' Association? Yes; and we attribute this to matters being discussed in conference between the conflicting parties the members of the conference being free from the heat and excitement of the persons who have raised the dispute. We are thus independent of local circumstances altogether and in some cases we have to take a different view to our own people and have to slate our own members and have prevented them going out on strike. In many cases there was a mutual compromise but in all cases the settlements were satisfactory except the one that cost us the largest amount of money although that was settled by compromise at last a few days after I reached the spot. In fact I visited New Zealand myself on purpose and settled the whole matter within two days after I got there.  The New Unionism is this - production must be for use not profit. (Cheers.) Competition is not necessary. Competition does not cheapen. Competition increases and does not cheapen the price of an article. Competition is not necessary to stimulate as some argue. How many men think about the question of competition or of the sale of an article when they are working at it? Do not good tradesmen take an interest in their work for the love of it and the desire to do the work well? It is nonsense to say that if you remove competition men will not excel. How many men of genius - the men who have given us the great things - thought of profit when they were inventing them? Was it not the thought of the gratification of having accomplished something with many of them? They did not think of themselves or of profit. Money has become a god it has been said and all humanity is asked to fall down and worship it. The preachers of Christianity have wandered from the teaching of the lowly Nazarene so far that even in our pulpits you will hear the ring of this money question. (Hear hear.) Some of them are afraid to denounce the sins of the wealthy class because many of them subscribe largely to the church and they dare not denounce them. They make collections and appeal for funds in the nature of a demand for services rendered. Is there anything of that kind put forward by the founder of Christianity? I think it is time that we looked into what they are doing. (Cheers.) Well then co-operation instead of competition is one of the aims of the New Unionism; giving equality of right equality of opportunity and equality of justice to all men. The destruction so to speak - and destruction is an ugly word to use but I don't know a better one - annihilation if you like it better - the doing away of that abnormal growth the aristocracy of land possession and setting up in its place an aristocracy of character genius and intellect. (Cheers.) That is the principle of the New Unionism. [753] When I have used the term of New Unionism it is not because we are going to abandon the principles that guided men in the early days of the old unionism. Under the old Unionism men sank their individualism for the common good of their own class. New Unionism asks the masses to sink individuality for the common good to unite on the common platform when they speak and when they vote to vote for the reforms that are necessary. (Cheers.) Many of the unions of Labor organisations that are in existence have adopted the "new unionism" out and out taking part in political questions and giving effect to their wishes at the ballot box. But "new unionism" means more than mere labor organisation. You have had an example during our recent elections of how men have endeavored to give effect to the proposals of the Labor party. You have seen how those who were non-unionists - the whole body of labor in fact - followed the advice of their mouthpiece or spokesman and joined together to achieve a common end. Dealing as we are to-night with the thought underlying the "new unionism" I call attention to that fact by way of illustration. This spirit is spreading amongst men and it is not to be measured by the number of members in Labor organisations or Trades Unions. It cannot be destroyed because members of some of the unions quarrel amongst themselves and their unions fall to pieces.  An organisation of labor constituted on the lines of "new unionism" will have to abolish entrance fees and contributions to the lowest sum at which it can possibly carry on. (Cheers.) The aim in this case is so to speak to go outside a particular organisation and take in all workers no matter what their occupation. Women workers will also be included for the spirit of "new unionism" makes no distinction of sex. Our present social system is altogether against the weak and certainly in favor of the strong. It is to me and must be to all strict observers a struggle in which a person possessing the least conscience sometimes wins the race. The weak are crushed down and on their prostrate bodies rise to eminence the unprincipled men who crush them. (Cheers.) New Unionism with its complete organisation must achieve a greater work than the old unionism which sought principally to maintain the rate of wages and the hours of labor. Love of our fellows should be broad enough to permit you taking in even those who are non-unionists - so long as they earn their living by labor. Remember that heredity and environment make each one of us what we are to-day. There is naturally a strong feeling something akin to hatred sometimes even a revengeful feeling when we look at what the capitalists - the employers of labor - are doing. In the old days labor looked askance at the employer and felt a hatred for him. New Unionism is to-day looking beyond the employer and fixing its hatred upon the system (cheers) which is bad not alone for the workman but for the employer.  The Ivanhoe Venture Case.  A DEFENCE LEAGUE FORMED.  On Sunday afternoon the adjourned public meeting in connection with the Ivanhoe Venture case was held at Hopkins & Co.'s mart at the Boulder. The Mayor (Mr. J.M. Hopkins) presided.  The Chairman explained that the meeting was called for the purpose of considering the decision of the Warden in the case Daley v. the Ivanhoe Venture. He was a shareholder in the company himself but he was broad-minded enough to say that if the gold was alluvial it should be got out and if the company would not work the mine as alluvial they should give way to those who would.   Mr. Paull moved "That in the opinion of this meeting the decision given in the recent pegging case Daley v. the Ivanhoe Venture Syndicate is contrary to the spirit of the mining regulation and if persisted in would be injurious to the best interests of the mining industry throughout West Australia." Though acting secretary of the Workers' Association he explained that he was not speaking on behalf of that association. There was no doubt in his mind that the gold was alluvial and it was going to be a big thing for the town and the district. Alluvial gold was always the fore-runner of reefs and had been the means of making Australia what it is. It was very rarely that a dispute arose as to whether gold was alluvial or reef but this was a case in point and he thought it should be fought out. [66]  Mr. Rutter seconded the motion. The Warden's action he said was contrary to the Spirit of the Act. Why should the alluvial miner who by his pluck opened up the country be crushed out by companies? if the alluvial miner after sinking a shaft 100 ft. discovered a lode it was to the benefit of the leaseholder and against the miner himself. At the present time there were 600 miners making a livelihood by searching for alluvial gold and if they were crushed out by leaseholders they would be thrown on the labor market to the great detriment of the district. It was the dry-blower who traced up the Great Boulder to its source or perhaps the company would not have sunk the shaft and developed the lease.  Mr. Macaw supported the motion. It was never intended he said by the Act that leases should be supposed to be a network of lodes. Further the Act never intended that a miner if a manager refused to delineate his line of reef should be forced into the position of a plaintiff. The Warden was supposed to go on to the lease and at the Government expense engage an expert to assist him. Daley as a simple miner filled in a form as provided by the Act and went into court without legal assistance only to find that he was in the position of a plaintiff and taxed in costs amounting to £18.  Mr. Weiss said that he did not believe that the Warden gave his decision deliberately against the miner. Every man was human and liable to err and a Magistrate moreover had to give a decision on the evidence in court. In his (the speaker's) opinion the case could not have been properly put before the Court. As Mr. Rutter had cogently put it a manager could put his pegs in the four corners of his lease and say "lodes run right through the lease; disprove it if you can." If a man were not allowed to sink how could he prove or disprove it?  The motion was carried unanimously.  Mr. P. Hughes moved - "That the foregoing resolution be forwarded to the Hons the Premier the Minister of Mines and the members for the district also to the Warden." Something he said would have to be done to assure the rights of alluvial miners. The spirit of the Act was that a man could mine to within 50 ft. of a reef but the warden's decision was that he could not. If it were to be taken as a precedent the alluvial miner was to be stamped out in favor of the grab-all who came after him.  Mr. Weiss seconded the motion which was carried.  Mr. Ryan moved - "That a committee of 12 be appointed to collect subscriptions for the purpose of employing counsel to carry on a test case or cases as may be deemed desirable in support of the rights and privileges of alluvial miners." Mr. Weiss had said that the Warden was influenced by the evidence given before him but really he was actuated by the influence before him. [67] Daley had no solicitor but the Ivanhoe Venture had. Mr. Daley was doing a public duty and it was not fair that he should have to bear all the expense.  Mr. Clark seconded the motion.   Mr. Daley in explanation said that he would not accept assistance from the public. The defence fund could be utilised for any future cases. (Applause.)  Mr. Macaw moved - "That in the opinion of this meeting it is desirable to form an association to be called 'The Alluvial Rights Protection Association' for the purpose of defending the interests of alluvial miners in West Australia." This was the second occasion in which alluvial miners were called upon to defend their rights and it was time that an association should be formed similar to the Prospectors' Association. Dry-blowers who were so often called away to rushes should have a central association and nowhere could a better place be found than at the Boulder. The association was especially necessary in view of an amended Mines Bill being soon before the House. He proposed that the fee should be 2s. 6d. a year and that in the event of funds being found insufficient a levy should be struck.  Mr. Walsh seconded the resolution which was carried. The Mayor and Messrs. Macaw Mannion Rutter Daley Regan Weiss Clark Paull Hughes Bourke and Conway were appointed a committee to form a league.  Mr. BARTON:   I was much struck by the quotations from Mr. Gladstone made by the President the other day. Speaking of the English Constitution the President quoted him as saying:  More it must admitted than any other it leaves open doors which lead into blind alleys for it presumes more boldly than my other the good sense and the good faith of these who work it.  Sir Henry Parkes went on to say:   The success of any constitution framed by man the success of every constitution call it what you may must depend upon the good sense self restraint and good faith of those who work it. [410] That is the interpretation-it is of course the only fair interpretation-which the President has put on the words of Mr. Gladstone. That quotation struck me when I read it. I did not hear the address but I read it as soon as possible afterwards. In relation to this question of the powers of the senate that quotation has appeared to me to be an argument which applies with singular force to the whole of the views which are held on each side of this question. If the British Constitution itself so elastic as it is is only a workable and smoothly working machine in proportion as those who work it are self-reliant self-restraining and discreet of course it is not to be expected that any other constitution labouring as any subsequent constitution must labour under the misfortune of being partly written will work with thorough satisfaction unless subject to the same-shall I call them-lubricating influences. But I take it that there is a great deal more than that in the meaning of this quotation because turning again to what the President said:Whichever way we frame our constitution the rule of discretion and good sense that guides us must inevitably be the same.Although the argument appeared to be put forward mainly in laudation of the British Constitution and to a certain extent in disparagement of the propositions that have been made-that is which had been then made in debate and which have now taken a more specific form in this Committee-still the force of the argument ought to be the same whichever way we frame our constitution and the words themselves uttered I think I may fairly say the strongest rebuke to all those whichever place they may come from who have made threats that they will leave as in our deliberations. Surely if that is the rule under which constitutions are to be worked it is the rule under which they are to be made. According to the prescience which the experience of Mr. Gladstone as here denoted gives us it is with that prescience we know that however we may err in allotting too much or too little power to this or that body we still have the good sense of an English-born race to carry us through and we ought at any rate to exhibit that amount of good faith in each other which should forbid us from saying if you do not accept this or that proposition we will leave the Convention. It does seem to be scarcely a worthy and scarcely a dignified position for any body of representatives sent here for the purpose of assisting to frame a constitution to take up to resent as some appeared to resent the investigation of their arguments. Surely it is for the investigation of arguments that we are here before we decide. And when gentlemen tell us when we investigate their arguments somewhat more closely than is agreeable to them that the next thing we shall have to investigate will be the appearance of their carpet bags it does seem that they are not making too large a demand on our patience; but exhibiting a spirit at variance with that spirit of compromise which they have all professed to have so much at heart.  Colonel SMITH:   The compromise is all on one side!  Mr. BARTON:   It is like the Irishman's reciprocity-it is all on one side.  Colonel SMITH:   We are to do all the compromising!  Mr. BARTON:   The hon. member says he does all the compromising. I do not think that is so; but he may have compromised his case to some extent yesterday by his speech with which I will deal presently. Any other idea of compromise does not seem to have entered his head. If we are to start on what has been called the do ut des or give-and-take principle in forming our constitution I venture to say to this Convention we are beginning to [411] make threats a great deal too early and I for one having the great confidence that I have in our hon. friends from Victoria and other hon. members from elsewhere have not the least expectation until the Convention has done its labours of seeing the pattern of their portmanteaux. Now there was another portion of the President's address which seemed to me to throw a good deal of light upon the manner in which the adjustment of the powers of the two houses of the general government should be proceeded with. The President told us that in the senatewe seek to create as lofty as dignified an upper chamber as we can and we seek to create it as nearly on the British model as we can.Whether the latter portion be entirely accurate or not I shall not undertake to say for the moment because I see certain amendments on the business-paper as to which I may have to express an opinion at a later stage and which may throw some doubt on the statement. We are also told that a senate ought to possess the "elements of a moral and just conservatism" and the President interpreted those elements in this way. He said that they werethose elements arising from experience from matured judgment from public probity from steadfastness of purpose and from the trust which is imposed in certain individuals as the growth of time.That is a collocation of a large number of the very highest attributes that could repose in legislators and it being the high ideal which our President has what struck me as being at any rate the subject of some speculation was this: Why after having created such a body as this for the avowed object of conserving state interests among other things should we propose to degrade this body by refusing them in the greatest emergencies the right to stand by those very interests? If you do this you will have either an altogether degraded senate-a senate which will not be the object of any man's ambition-or if you call to that senate if you succeed in getting into it men such as the President has so worthily and eloquently described what will be the result? If they are a body of mature judgment and experience if they are a lofty and dignified body is it a spectacle for a free constitution that we should at any time see them sitting with folded arms while the interests which they were elected to guard are passing away for ever? Surely it is not making a constitution if we proceed in that way. If we proceed to work up to and to realise an idea of this kind and then having created almost the summum bonum of legislative power knock the very power out of its hands by a couple of words in a federal constitution surely we rather mock than make a constitution. That is the view which struck me as one which was at any rate tenable from the remarks made by the President. After all it comes back to the quotation from Mr. Gladstone. The working of any constitution will depend upon the discretion and good sense of those who frame it and live under it and it is not because that discretion and good sense have had to be invoked countless times for the preservation of a constitution-I use the term with the utmost reverence-of the loose character of the English Constitution that we are to argue that when we make a constitution of a more defined character that good sense will fly away if you import a federal government. Surely that is not a good deduction from a knowledge of the race to which we belong or from the work which we ourselves have done in the making of constitutions. But we are told that we are now attempting to create two houses having an equal power to deal with money bills as they think fit. I venture to say however that none of us are in any way seeking to confer with [412] respect to money bills an equal power on the two houses. Those who have been strongest in their advocacy of this conservation of state interests to the mutual satisfaction of the parties to this compact have admitted all along that there is an ultimate power which will vest in the hands of the people. They begin with the power of origination which in itself as any one's experience of parliamentary procedure will tell him as a sole power involves practically the ultimate control. But it has not been contended by the strongest advocate of state rights here that under all circumstances and in all events the veto which the senate may impose in whole or in part is to be immovable and unchangeable.  Mr. MUNRO:   Yes!  Mr. MOORE:   No!  Mr. BARTON:   It has not been contended.  Mr. MUNRO:   Yes by everyone on that side!  Mr. BARTON:   I say that it has not been contended-at least that is my view. Every one of the speakers so far as I can understand his meaning seemed to couple his strong assertion of the necessity of guarding these interests with the allowance that when matters came to a deadlock or a crisis there must be some mode of settlement and most of them concurred in saying that in the ultimate resort there must be some method provided by which the people could decide either directly or otherwise.  Mr. WRIXON:   That was said only by the hon. member Sir John Bray!  Mr. BARTON:   It is the impression which I have gained from the debates and I think that if the hon. member Mr. Munro had listened to and read these debates with perhaps a little less of the idea that hon. gentlemen opposite were attempting to make some fixed and immovable thing which would be as hard to get rid of as one of Cleopatra's Needles if he thought for a moment that those who were opposed to him were nearly one and all conceding that there must be at any rate some means of removing friction and terminating deadlocks I think we should not have had this recourse to carpet bags instead of argument. It is a very great mistake to say that we are attempting to constitute two co-equal houses. There is no one here whose remarks I can interpret in that sense at all. Certainly strongly as I endeavoured to express myself on the subject I have no consciousness of having attempted to assert that any such unalterable position should be taken up nor have I gathered the same from the remarks of any one else who has taken part in the debate. And now I would ask those who have given utterance to something like extreme intentions on a supposition such as I have described to pause a minute to see whether there is not amongst us some means of arriving at a reasonable conclusion which will not be all giving on one side or all taking on the other. It is not as it has been described a newfangled proposal that has been made. It is not as it has been described something entirely un-English and utterly opposed to the development of constitutional government because although I for one agree with the President in saying that we are not here to make any mere transcript of the American Constitution I think that we must concede that it was a highly English population which framed the American Senate; and we must all concede that that constitution was framed with an intimate knowledge of the constitutional history of the country from which its authors had sprung and with so far as it might be a desire in what they considered safe limits to imitate the model that existed for their emulation and their wonder. But it is not proposed to set up the American Senate as part of the constitution now to be framed. The American Senate has powers very much wider and [413] very much larger than any that are attempted to be given by any proposal that has been made in this Convention. To begin with the limitation of the coordinate rights of the American Senate is purely with regard to bills for raising revenue that is to say taxation bills; and with regard to bills of appropriation of the expenditure-as far as the Constitution is concerned there is absolutely no limit upon their originating or co-ordinate powers. That has never been proposed or suggested for a moment nor has it been suggested that the senate should be the depository of these very large powers which accompany its existence in the American Constitution. I refer to certain rights with regard to impeachment and to certain other executive rights which here there is no intention and no dream of conferring upon such a body. But it is sought to be shown that where the citizen has to be represented first through the national assembly and next through another chamber that where his representation in those two bodies is the sum total of his representation to take away any portion of that full sum of representation is not in furtherance of the spirit of democracy but it is a lopping down of the representation to which the democracy ought not to consent. That is the position-and it is not an "extremely conservative" position-which those who contend for a fair measure of power in the senate are now occupying. If a citizen is to be represented-and we have it on high authority-the authority quoted the other day of Sir William Jones-that the only men who can constitute a state are high-minded men who can see their rights and having a just conception of them dare maintain them-if that is the definition of a state then the representatives of such a state are representatives of such men and if the representatives of the state in the senate are the representatives of such men and such a body as the President has described them then it is wresting some of the citizen's power of representation out of his hands to say "As much as the house of representatives may do anywhere else it shall do and may do here; but as much as under any other federal constitution you know of the other chamber may do it shall not do." That is not giving his full sum of representation; it is taking something away; so that after all the whole process that is proposed has nothing un-English about it because it is an attempt to center a full measure of representation instead of taking any of it away. That also lets some light upon another branch of the question because it has been said that there is some analogy between the senate proposed and other upper chambers; and my hon. friend Mr. Deakin said something about the experience of constitutions in British countries. Now the experience of constitutions in British countries with the exception of Canada is not the experience of federation at all and so far as it applies to Canada there are provisions in the Canadian Constitution which tend at present and may tend strongly ultimately to convert that constitution more into an amalgamation than a federation to minimise the powers of the states and to exalt those of the general body. Now it seems to be an accepted concession on all hands that the powers to be given to the federal body by this Convention so far as it can induce the concurrence of the respective parliaments are to be without speaking of the American or Canadian system at all rather those powers which are expressed as necessary and incidental to the purposes of federation and not those which come within the large range of powers included in such a clause as exists in constitutions giving the residuary power to the general body. If that is the intention you cannot carry it out without giving adequate power to both your houses because by so much as you [414] depart from that if you give too much power to the senate you tend to exalt the federal idea to the suppression of the national idea; and if you do the converse as the hon. member Mr. Deakin I am afraid wishes to do you tend to exalt the national idea in the direction of unification or amalgamation to the destruction of the federal idea. That I am sure is not the mandate which hon. members bear from their respective parliaments; it is not the mandate which any one of our parliaments has given us. We are told in that mandate-reading behind the words in which that mandate is couched-we are told that the kind of federation which Australia will tolerate the kind of federation which I hope it may grow to love is that which does not suppress or tend to minimise the powers of the several states beyond those matters which are expressly taken away from them. Then I submit that by so much as you diminish that portion of the sum of representation of a citizen which lies in the senate you will exalt the national and diminish the federal principle; by so much as you topple over on the other side you are doing precisely the converse. Then what you have to do is to see that you do justice and to do justice in this matter can never be consummated by bringing about such an engrossment of power into the hands of a national body as would result in the minimising of the states who have never given any such mandate to their representatives. On that ground we are entitled and bound to report a strong senate to our parliaments as a desirable provision in the constitution. I submit that if we take away from the senate the power of vetoing money bills unless they veto them altogether we shall so cripple that body that we shall not be able to report to our parliaments that which I believe they want. It is all very well to talk about the struggles that have taken place. It has been said that the whole of the struggle in England has been "to wrest from irresponsible power the right to deal with taxation and the revenues of the country." There is no endeavour to give to an irresponsible power the right to deal with taxation and the revenues of the country. If there is anybody who doubts that I would refer him to the resolution which we are considering and which referring to the senate says:So securing to the body itself a perpetual existence combined with definite responsibility to the electors.The doctrine of the denial of interference in any way with money bills springs out of the maxim that taxation and representation shall go hand in hand. Where you have two representative bodies then to the extent of the proportion of representation which you give the second chamber you are entitled having faith in that maxim to give it the power of interference with money bills. Now we are told that such a provision as this cannot be grafted on to any constitution in a British land. I would ask the hon. member Mr. Clark what he thinks of that because if I remember rightly there has been a power of amendment in the Constitution of Tasmania; and although there may have been little tiffs as there are sometimes between married people still the constitution of that country on the whole has worked well There has been no deviation from the principle of responsible government and it exists with a power in its upper chamber-too large a power perhaps to confer on an upper chamber under the circumstances-which has not tended to the Subversion of responsible government and which has certainly not been any impediment to the smooth and constitutional working of it. Therefore if we appeal to experience we have at any rate in this direction one clear experience.Mr. BURGESS:   It has been for the general good!  Mr. FYSH:   South Australia also! [415]   Mr. BARTON:   In South Australia there is a degree of experience in the same direction; but I am not going to enter into that matter. In Tasmania there is a perfectly well-defined experience in the same direction that is as connected with the working of responsible government and that of itself seems to solve a great many of the difficulties which hon. gentlemen have felt when they have suggested that the giving of powers of amendment or veto in detail to a second chamber is incompatible with the working of responsible government. It cannot be so. We have proved that it is not so in the working of the matter.  Mr. MUNRO:   Would the hon. member say that the South Australian upper house can alter the details of an appropriation bill?  Mr. BARTON:   I was not saying anything of the kind. I was appealing to the Constitution of Tasmania which contains the power of amendment.  Sir JOHN BRAY:   Does the hon. member say that it expressly contains the power of amendment?  Mr. BARTON:   I believe that there is some power in that direction.  Sir JOHN BRAY:   Does the hon. member say that the constitution expressly vests the power of amendment in the council in Tasmania?  Mr. BARTON:   In Tasmania if I recollect.  Mr. FYSH:   The power is an implied one but the practice is such!  Mr. BARTON:   The point is not a very important one because the question is as to the working of responsible government where the power of amendment is exercised and if the upper chamber in Tasmania has been in the habit of exercising the power of amendment-sometimes the upper house have done it even here and have survived notwithstanding all they have heard by way of withering denunciation of themselves-  Colonel SMITH:   That is the worst of it-they do survive!  Mr. BARTON:   That is a matter of opinion. I always notice that the time of practical politicians generally comes when they have done representing such places as Ballarat and take a seat in the nominee or upper chamber; and we always find that on those occasions there is a singular silence on subjects of this kind.  Colonel SMITH:   We have no nominee chamber there. It is elective!  Mr. BARTON:   I know it is and I recollect that a very popular leader under whom my hon. friend served has found occasion of late years to sigh for a nominee chamber in the interest of democracy.  Mr. MUNRO:   I would not allow him!  Mr. BARTON:   I know that my hon. friend Mr. Munro would not allow him if he could help it. My hon. friend Mr. Munro when we were yesterday discussing and he was saying something on the subject of those powers said "We have the representatives of the larger colonies joining to insist on this." Someone made an interjection with reference to the delegates of New South Wales and his answer was "Those others are members of the Legislative Council."  Mr. MUNRO:   In Victoria!  Mr. BARTON:   I thought with regard to New South Wales too.  Mr. MUNRO:   I said nothing about New South Wales!  Mr. BARTON:   It does not matter whether it applies to New South Wales or to Victoria. But I should like to know whether my hon. friend Mr. Munro is under the impression that the argument of a member of this Convention duly sent here under powers which he recognises is weakened by the fact that he belongs to either a nominee or an elective upper house. If he thinks that the argument is weakened and thinks less of it for that reason I ask whether he imputes a motive to those who belong to nominee chambers? [416]   Mr. MUNRO:   I was not talking of nominee chambers at all!  Mr. BARTON:   I will say with regard to elective chambers. Has the hon. member found that the advocacy of the principle of representation of the states in fair strength in the federal senate is confined to members of the elective house in Victoria? Has he found that in his reading or that the large body of authorities who have dealt ably with this question and whom one cannot read too closely are strongly in favour of the granting of such powers to second chambers where the federal principle prevails and have added their own need of admiration of the ability the vigour and the touch kept with the people on the part of the Senate of the United States. Without talking of making any mere transcript let us look at this one fact-that with a people perhaps the most democratic in the world we find that their veneration and respect for that chamber their confidence in it is not only as great as it is for what is called the popular chamber but is even greater. That is a sufficient answer by itself to any argument based on the mere question of the support of a certain conviction by a member of an elective upper house. But going back from that I come now to what was said by my hon. friend Colonel Smith. My hon. friend expressed a great deal of dread as to what would happen if the smaller colonies were intrusted through their representatives in the senate with the powers here claimed; and he pointed out that with respect to other matters he was in accord with the resolution which offered them equal representation on the senate; but be wished to confine their powers with regard to money bills. Well if he has confidence in their patriotism in this regard and if he admits that under the resolution to which he has assented or a portion of which at any rate may be said to have passed its second reading they are to be representative bodies-representative of the states which send them there-why should he for a moment decline to place in there hands with regard to money legislation some modicum of the power which he would give them with regard to general legislation?  Colonel SMITH:   A modicum but not the whole!  Mr. BARTON:   The hon. member is willing to give them that which is practically of no effect. I may as well point out now what is so frequently the result. I am not going to argue from what I am about to say that upper houses elsewhere should have these powers of amending or vetoing in detail money bills because that is beside the present question. But we have found that where that power is denied the friction is greater than where the power is granted and the necessity of the case points out why the friction is greater-because where the power is denied the immense probability in a large class of cases of money bills is that where there is a matter of principle involved affecting rights which they think should be conserved-this is a very important matter when you come to consider it with regard to a federal senate the result of confining the power of veto to veto en bloc is this: either a good measure of public policy is lost because without rejecting it the second chamber cannot preserve the rights which it has in its keeping or the measure of public policy is passed for the sake of its policy; and in passing it the right or principle which should be conserved for the public safety is utterly sacrificed. That result cannot be good for in seeking federation there would be sacrifice either of the public policy of the nation or of the interest of the state and if there is a way out of [417] the difficulty by which that sacrifice need not occur why should we not adopt it! I do not say any more than the hon. member Sir John Bray says that this power of veto should be final and conclusive. Let us set our ingenuity to work; let us appoint a committee on that subject if need be to find out some means of accommodating this conflict. But do not let us talk about packing our portmanteaux the first difficulty we see. When people see lions in the path the best thing for them is to drop their portmanteaux and not to pack them.  Colonel SMITH:   The hon. member cannot get over the carpet bag!  Mr. BARTON:   I cannot. When I have heard my genial friend Colonel Smith speak of his enjoyment of his stay in Sydney the idea of his taking flight in that way causes me more astonishment than I am prepared to express. There is one thing I should like to instance as throwing considerable light upon this question. Supposing that some of the threats we have heard were fulfilled. Supposing for instance that a jot too much power in the estimation of my hon. friend Mr. Munro and his colleagues were conferred on the federal senate-that jot which was a little bit too much for them-and that this exodus did take place and we were unable to form this federation from the want of our hon. friends. What would be the result of that? It cannot be supposed that these colonies would keep apart always. I am not going to threaten my hon. friend Mr. Munro as a certain other colony was threatened yesterday with the formation of another and an outside federation. But I am going to suppose this case: that thinking better of the policy of entire isolation some five or six years hence-I hope of course be will still be in office and that there will be a coalition ministry including my other two hon. friends-Victoria has always been supposed to be the colony most eager for federation; and supposing that it became again ready for federation with New South Wales after the sudden death of the principle in its heart after the space of five years what would happen then? By that time at the present rate of increase in the population of the respective colonies the population of Victoria would be 1250000 and that of New South Wales as nearly as possible would be 1500000. A popular assembly formed at the ratio of one member to every 25000 persons would give sixty representatives to New South Wales and fifty representatives to Victoria. Now supposing the two colonies came to terms and had a little convention of their own just as we are holding our Convention to-day but on a much smaller scale. We should then have the question of the powers of the senate taken into consideration. It would of course be conceded by New South Wales as it is conceded to-day that the representation in the senate should be equal; but if my hon. friend Sir Henry Parkes-supposing him then still to be leading the cause of federation as we all trust he may be if it is not accomplished in the meantime said as he would say to-day "Your senate may have the power of rejection. The senate in which we are equally represented may have the power of rejection; the house of representatives shall have the sole power of origination and there shall be no power of amendment what would be the retort of Victoria? "Your sixty representatives in the lower chamber would swamp our fifty and where should we be?" I imagine whether my hon. friend remained in office until then or not we should have a very prompt recognition-not only a recognition but a very prompt and sturdy assertion-of the principle of state rights as far as it is involved in giving the power of veto in detail.  Mr. MUNRO:   Not a bit of it!  Mr. BARTON:   My hon. friend thinks not. Let him wait until he comes to that [418] position if be ever does. I would suggest to him that instead of raising that difficulty be should accept a reasonable solution of this question. Let us appoint a select committee-  Mr. MUNRO:   Let us have it!  Mr. BARTON:   Let us inquire calmly into the matter and let us have no more talk of catching the express in a hurry.  Mr. MUNRO:   No one talked about that but the hon. member and the colonel!  Mr. BARTON:   I have not the least doubt that the colonel is a remarkably faithful representative of his colleagues. I therefore submit taking this matter as a whole that while reasonable compromise should be acceded to there should still be preserved that in one of these chambers which will represent the federal principle some power of dealing with money bills to such an extent as will arrest the course of legislation if need be in favour of state interests and in the course of arresting it will not cause the friction the irritation and the jealousy which will result from the losing of large measures of policy for the sake of an amendment. I do not throw this out as a suggestion; but suppose that the power of veto in detail were not exercisable after the specific matter on which it was exercised once had been made the subject of a general election so that after the ascertainment of the popular will a bill were sent up again involving the same matter. I do not suggest it as the best way of settling the difficulty but it is one suggestion which no doubt will present itself to a committee. Suppose it to be accompanied also by some provision of this kind: That lest the non-intervention of a general election should cause continued friction there should be no veto in detail for a greater number of times than twice. I do not say that would settle the question. I do not say that on thinking it out it is a proposition to which I should be ready to accede. I say it is one of a number of propositions which might well engage the attention of the Committee and that therefore we ought not to be keeping our backs too stiff upon this matter. Sir we ought to entertain a reasonable probability when we are taking this matter a step further which we may well very soon do that a compromise will be effected which will enable us to deal with other lions in the path and will not force us to go back to those who have sent us here to tell them that we have falsified their hopes and met with a failure disastrous in itself and all the more ignominious because it arose from mere irritation and jealousy.  Tuesday 10 March 1891.   FIFTH DAY'S DEBATE.  Debate resumed on resolutions proposed by Sir Henry Parkes (vide page 23).  Mr. DIBBS:   Sir I have listened with patience and interest to the speeches which have been delivered by the distinguished men who have preceded me and I must confess to a feeling of nervousness in attempting to follow the speeches that have been delivered and in attempting to add anything to the arguments that have been used. And yet I venture to think that in the main the important speeches that have been delivered have to a certain extent but touched the fringe of the question of federation. If I were asked my opinion as to who was the speaker who dealt most boldly [175] and vigorously with that which is to be the centre and basis on which a federation of the colonies can take place I should say that it was my hon. friend Sir Thomas McIlwraith. We have had from very able speakers namely the hon. members Sir Samuel Griffith Mr. Deakin and Mr. Barton a clever discussion as to one phase of the federation question; that is with regard to state rights. No doubt that is one of those questions which will have to be dealt with by the Convention in due time; but it appears to me that we are just a little in advance in dealing with the question of state rights before we agree among ourselves as to what is to be the real basis upon which federation shall take place. As however the debate proceeding upon the resolutions which you sir have moved has taken the shape of a discussion of the question of state rights it would perhaps be more convenient to the Convention if I now said a few words on that subject. So far as I have heard and I have paid the utmost attention to the arguments used the contention is conclusively in favour of making the senate a strong and powerful body in the interests of the whole of Australasia and in the interests of each particular colony. If we wish the federal government to be respected; if we wish the federal constitution to be based upon equity and justice those who differ from the proposals of the hon. members Sir Samuel Griffith and Mr. Barton with regard to placing the states in a position of fair representation in the senate must yield at once and with the best possible grace. The whole question of federation will come to grief and be a lamentable failure if the suggestions of those hon. members are not carried out. The very difficulty which has presented itself to this Convention at the threshold of our meeting was one of the main difficulties which pressed themselves upon the great men who a hundred years ago met to settle a constitution for the United States. I have no doubt that every argument which has been used on both sides in this Convention was freely used by the able men who debated the question a hundred years ago and a settlement was arrived at by giving effect to the view advocated by Sir Samuel Griffith that the smaller states especially should have a guarantee of security by the method which he proposes; and unless such a compromise had been made in the case of the American Constitution there would have been no constitution for the United States at all. As far as I can read a difficulty arose upon the very question which we have been debating here. The state of Connecticut took up the running and in a book which is in the hands of hon. members "The Civil Government of the United States" by Fisk I find a short passage which strongly illustrates what was argued then and what has been argued here; and it shows the wisdom of the conclusion arrived at by the men who established the American Constitution which has borne the battle and the breeze for 100 years. Personally I have an objection to the use of quotations from books; but this is one bearing so strongly upon the issues involved here that I am sure hon. members will permit me to read it:-This feature of the House of Representatives caused the smaller states in the convention to oppose the whole scheme of constructing a new government. They were determined that great and small states should have equal weight in congress. Their steadfast opposition threatened to ruin everything when fortunately a method of compromise was discovered. It was intended that the national legislature in imitation of the state legislatures should have an upper house or senate and at first the advocates of a strong national government proposed that the senate also should represent population thus differing from the lower house only in the way in which we have seen that it generally differed in the several states. But it happened that in the state of Connecticut the custom was peculiar. There it had always been the custom to elect [176] the governor and upper house by a majority vote of the whole people while for each township there was an equality of representatives in the lower house. The Connecticut delegation in the convention therefore being familiar with a legislature in which the two houses were composed on different principles suggested a compromise "Let the House of Representatives" they said "represent the people-We propose to do that here.and let the senate represent the states-That is the proposal of the hon. member Sir Samuel Griffith.Let all the states great and small be represented equally in the federal senate." Such was the famous Connecticut compromise. Without it the convention would probably have broken up without accomplishing anything. When it was adopted half the work of making the new government was done; for the small states having had their fears thus allayed by an assurance that they were to be equally represented in the senate no longer opposed the work but cooperated in it most zealously.It appears to me that the quotation I have just read pretty well solves the difficulty which has arisen in the early debates of this Convention. The question is: Will you give the small states a guarantee of security against the larger states who may outvote them if you establish the representation in the senate upon the basis of population. Let us take for example the small colony of Western Australia. If its representation in the senate is based upon population and not on equal rights with other colonies that colony would simply be snuffed out of existence by the larger colonies. Under such a state of things as that is it to be supposed for one moment that the smaller colonies of Australasia could contemplate joining the federation? Representation on the basis of population seems to be fair and equitable so far as the house of representatives is concerned; but you must give to the smaller colonies in their representation in the senate equal rights with those enjoyed by the larger colonies. Unless that is done the whole scheme will come to grief from a want of that spirit of compromise equity and justice which ought to be shown in dealing with the smaller states. From my point of view I think that that question has been fairly thrashed out and that this Convention will when a division is taken upon that particular view of the question be almost unanimous in doing justice and equity to those smaller states without whose assistance the idea of federation would be but a myth. It ought to be our duty in any proposals which we make for legislation by the various colonies to endeavour to create a strong powerful senate which will have the confidence of the people out of doors. We can only do that by giving a guarantee and an assurance to the smaller colonies that we shall not leave them in such a position that they will be almost annexed to the larger colonies or simply wiped out of existence. The arguments put forward by the gentlemen I have named and others who have spoken on this particular phase of the question have to my mind been conclusive and we must do justice if we are to expect anything like union or federation of the various colonies. In the case of New South Wales and Victoria we have two large and powerful colonies. In the house of representatives they will be enormously represented-that seems to be fair and just. I might even put Queensland in conjunction with New South Wales and Victoria. In the case of South Australia with its moderate population; in the case of Western Australia with its very small population; in the case of the hundred and odd thousand who may be represented in Tasmania we must consult their interests render to them a full measure of justice and equity and establish a strong and powerful senate which will do justice to them and which at the same time will give security to the people at large. That phase of the question has been well thrashed out and in the minds of this Convention I think there will be but one conclu- [177] sion. But it appears to me that after all however interesting the debate has been and however instructive-and I admit it has been to myself very instructive on account of the views so ably put forward by the speakers who have preceded me - I think we are rather in advance of the real subject when we deal with that phase before taking in hand the other important issues as a basis upon which federation shall take place. Sir Thomas McIlwraith to use a figurative though not very elegant expression took the bull by the horns very boldly and he told the Convention-and I am certain his remarks met with the approval of most members of the Convention-that there was a question which should be considered in advance of that of state rights. Are we to understand that is to be the bedrock upon which federation is to take place? The bedrock upon which federation is to take place appears to my mind to be that the Convention must agree among themselves clearly and definitely to lay down the lines of the future fiscal policy of Australia and that must not be done by inference but be clearly laid down as one of the principles of federation before we can proceed one step further in our discussion. Of course there are other questions which will arise as we proceed in this debate. While we are here sitting in th  Who says this?  Mr. DIBBS:   The Sydney Horning Herald of 1877; and I may tell my hon. friend Colonel Smith that the Sydney Morning Herald voices the opinions of the moderate and temperate people of New South Wales.Until therefore Victoria is converted to a free-trade policy or can convert her neighbours to one of protection there can be no federal union between them.And I believe that is the voice of the whole of New South Wales. I leave the members from the other great colonies and even from the smaller colonies to speak for themselves on that point. The article goes on to say:This is a vital question which must be agreed upon in advance and could not as Mr. Forster appears to imagine be left to be fought out afterwards. Now sir we are engaged upon the consideration of this great work and it appears to me that Victoria has triumphed with regard to the principles of protection throughout the whole of Australasia until at the present moment she has attacked the citadel of free-trade New South Wales. Step by step and one by one the principles of protection started twenty-five years ago by Victoria have maintained their own and Victoria has gradually drawn South Australia Tasmania New Zealand-I do not know much about Western Australia because she is young in the business-but she has drawn Queensland also into the same line of policy the wisdom of which has been acknowledged by the statesmen of the other colonies and she has at last approached to make one last convert in order to complete the chain. And now Mr. President I must congratulate you upon being the last convert to protection. You sir plainly indicate by the resolutions you have moved that you are the last convert to protection and that the free-trade party can receive at your hands its death warrant-its nunc dimittis I may call it. Free-trade in this colony has received from this Convention or from its President the Premier of the supposed free-trade colony of New South Wales its death warrant. It appears to me that Victoria has triumphed that what the Herald in 1877 foreshadowed as the lines upon which federation might possibly take place namely the conversion of the other colonies to protection has been accomplished and we find the Premier of the only free-trade colony prepared to sink the fiscal question in advance and leave it to be settled by the federal parliament when federation is established. I believe that the people of New South Wales can look upon you as the latest convert to the wisdom of the policy of protection which in twenty-five years has pushed Victoria into the proud position in [180] which she stands to-day. This fiscal question has taken I gather from some of the speeches which have been delivered here an extraordinary turn. To my surprise I have gathered that Victoria in discussing the fiscal question in this Convention is asking for guarantees to secure the protection of her vested interests. Now in a footrace where one of the rivals has an advantage of 25 yards start in 100 one would not ask for an assurance that the man who had the 25 yards start should win; or when on the turf horses are handicapped by weights one would not ask for a guarantee that the horse with the heaviest weight should "play the Carbine" in the business. But it appears to me that Victoria has had the effrontery to come here and by the mouths of some of her delegates to tell us at once that she in any settlement of this question requires to have guarantees for the protection of her vested interests though one would think that having the advantage of twenty-five years' start on the whole of Australasia she would not require anything more. We are prepared to give her the advantage which the energy and pluck of her people and their determination to lead the whole of Australia have gained for her in the twenty-five years' start which she has had; but we are not prepared to give her more than that. If we are going to deal with this matter in the liberal spirit suggested by the press if we are going to have as the 2nd resolution puts it inter-colonial free-trade and if federation is to come within a reasonable time inter-colonial free-trade must come at once and the colonies of South Australia Queensland Tasmania and New South Wales will be the biggest victims and will make the largest sacrifice. So far the Parliament of New South Wales has only given a sort of half-hearted approval of even the meeting of this Convention and the people have not yet been consulted upon it at all though in due time they will be consulted and will have the advantage of the public education which they are now receiving upon the big questions which concern them in giving their decision. But coming back to this question of meeting each other in a friendly spirit what in the name of reason and right does Victoria require more than the fact that she has had the markets of pretty well the whole of Australasia open to her for the last twenty-five years?  Mr. GORDON:   As much as she can get!  Mr. DIBBS:   That is the weakness of human nature. The cry offer considering the size of the colony and the almost juvenile manufactures which it possesses and New South Wales is prepared to give to Victoria all the advantages of her twenty-five years' start and to stand shoulder to shoulder with her and do the best we can in honest competition. But I should like the hon. member Mr. Gillies who I believe will speak to-day and whose speech will have an atten- [181] tive hearing from the members of the Convention and from the people of the various colonies to be perfectly clear and straight and if the speeches which have been delivered do not voice the sentiments of the people of Victoria let him as an enlightened statesman give us the assurance that Victoria wants nothing more than she now possesses and that upon the question of federation she will ask for no other advantages than that which she has gained by the twenty-five years' advance in statesmanship which has been made by the people who have ruled her destiny. I shall listen to my hon. friend's speech with great interest. From conversation which I have had with her delegates I gather that South Australia is prepared to take a liberal view on this question and we ask Victoria to come in now and to throw in her lot with us. If we can get Victoria to say that she is prepared to lay the foundation-stone of a possible federation by agreeing at once to a customs union in advance if need be of the settlement of the federation question-if she will at once agree to throw in her lot with us one of the greatest difficulties in the way of federation will be removed. But there are other big questions besides this question of protection. The big and difficult question of the rights to the Murray River will have to be settled in a spirit of liberal compromise. It is one of those questions which no doubt federation would be the means of settling for ever and a question which Victorian statesman no doubt will keep in their minds'-eye and which the people of New South Wales will always have before them in coming to any adjustment of those bones of contention which have by our territorial boundaries been allowed to come between us. The magnitude of the question was not seen at the time; but it has developed until it has become a cause of discord almost between the colonies. The fiscal question however appears to me to be the kernel of the whole business. It was in 1884; it is so to-day; and it will remain the principal barrier or to use the expression of the Hon. James Service the lion in the path to anything like federation unless Victoria gives a bold and generous assurance to this Convention that she is prepared to deal in the same liberal spirit as the two great colonies of South Australia and Queensland with the people of New South Wales. This being accomplished other matters will fall in like a piece of mosaic. Having laid the foundation-stone your superstructure will rise with some prospect of being a permanent building; but you will never advance one foot towards the accomplishment of federation so long as the fiscal question remains unsettled and the whole of the colonies of Australasia have the assurance by the resolutions proposed by the President that free-trade New South Wales is prepared to make the fiscal question second to that of federation. The other day a letter was published giving the opinion of Sir Hercules Robinson upon this question; and when I read that letter I regretted that the hon. gentleman who had addressed Sir Hercules in the first instance had not published the letter which he wrote. It is a very important link in enabling one to comprehend what Sir Hercules Robinson meant. But what did Sir Hercules tell the Premier of this colony? He said "Give up free-trade; make a sacrifice of free-trade to secure federation for the people of Australia" And it appears to me that that is the course which you sir have taken. You have accepted the advice; and it must be the result of your own large experience that what has hitherto divided the great colonies of Victoria and New South Wales and has kept the other colonies away from New South Wales has been the division in feeling with regard to the fiscal question. Now what position has New South Wales occupied [182] with regard to the other colonies? She has been practically the mother of all the other colonies. From her loins have mainly sprung the bone and sinew of the colonies which now surround her and she can fairly look upon the surrounding colonies practically as her own children.  Mr. GORDON:   Some of them!  Mr. DIBBS:   South Australia underwent a different I may say a Caesarian operation in its birth. The inheritance which its people now possess was cut out from the vitals of the parent state. But taking the colonies of Australasia as a whole we may say that New South Wales is in the position of a parent towards them. Her children have grown up vigorous and strong around her and they have found that she has not been a hard step-mother to them but rather a loving mother. She has been the recipient of the manufactures and the produce of her children until with the hautiness and robustness of Australian youth they have almost crushed the old parent out of existence. New South Wales has been an affectionate mother to the people of the other colonies inasmuch as she has received into her markets under the spurious system of free-trade a large bulk of their produce. And that brings me to the very agreeable speech which fell from the hon. member Captain Russell. Now the position of New Zealand in regard to this fiscal question is very unique The hon. member Captain Russell told us that New Zealand was prepared to receive the embraces of the people of New South Wales and indeed of the whole of Australia; but when federation approaches anything like realisation she will probably find herself in the position of those states of the American union which at first refused to be a part of the union and which compelled the states already in the union to give them-not the tender embraces of brotherhood but the hug of the bear before they saw their way to join the union. New South Wales has been the principal receiver of the produce of the vast granaries of New Zealand; and I have no doubt New Zealand will find it to her advantage to remain outside of the federation if she can still have the ports of New South Wales under our spurious free-trade system and to the detriment of our own farmers open to her. She would no doubt like to evade the responsibility of federation and at the same time have our markets open to her. But if ever the Australian colonies as separate from the rest of Australasia unite in a bond of inter-colonial free-trade it will be most unjust to the whole of Australia if New Zealand is allowed to keep the advantage which she now has of free-trade with New South Wales thus having all the colonies open to her produce. New Zealand is a convert to protection; she has taken the bit into her own mouth and has left the free-trade course in which New South started her. She has struck out on the lines of Victoria and as one of the converted colonies she must join with us or be left out in the cold if federation takes place. We cannot afford to give her the advantages of our markets unless she joins with us in the federation. I say that with every respect for our New Zealand friends whose presence here has lent a charm to a large extent to the proceedings of this Convention. Before going further I should like to say a word or two on the resolutions themselves. I have no doubt that they in due time will be carried pro forma; and I have no doubt that the real squabble will take place when we go into Committee and when it is proposed to amend the resolutions so as to put them into practical shape. On behalf of New South Wales I would point out that the 1st resolution which you Mr. President have proposed:That the powers and privileges and territorial rights of the several existing colonies shall remain intact- [183] has been put forward mainly as a sop to the people of New South Wales. There has been a desire on the part of the framer of these resolutions to tell the people of New South Wales that in joining the federation the object will be to preserve to them their territorial rights and all the advantages of their present position. We must not however be unmindful of the fact that there can be no federal government without to a large extent the sacrifice of some portion of state rights; and when the word "provinces" is used in this debate I ignore its existence altogether. We have been as it were chaffed out of our very existence. Those of us who have spoken within the walls of this building or who have spoken out of doors to our constituents and have endeavoured in discussing the federal question to take a strong view of the position in regard to the defence of the rights of New South Wales have been pulled to pieces and called provincialists. I object in connection with the independent state of New South Wales-a state as independent as any in the world even England itself so far as the freedom of our position is concerned-to the word "province." There may be something more dignified in the use of the word "state." We are not going to become provinces. I do not think we are going to give up the individual rights and liberties which we possess and which those who have gone before us have fought for to become mere provinces under a federal form of government. We may take the more dignified form of "states." Whilst we have endeavoured to put before the people of New South Wales in these resolutions a sort of opiate something assuring to their minds that in joining a federal union we give up nothing of our territorial rights words have been inserted in them which I shall do my utmost in Committee to strike out-except in respect to such surrenders as may be agreed upon as necessary and incidental to the power and authority of the national federal government.I do not know the meaning of these words and no hon. gentleman who has yet spoken has given any clear interpretation of them. It is sufficient for us in enunciating a principle upon which the basis of a constitution shall be prepared to see that the territorial rights and privileges of each colony shall be preserved to each state but when you come to consider the condition of a surrender and the question of the power of enforcing such surrender is placed in the hands of the federal government then your provinces or your states will be no party to the proceeding.  Mr. GILLIES:   The resolution does not say that!  Mr. DIBBS:   Well I shall be very glad to have any other meaning placed upon it. It will be for the federal government to claim and I take it for the federal government to enforce.  Mr. McMILLAN:   The word "surrenders" carries its own meaning!  Mr. DIBBS:   I think in a resolution in which we are asked to affirm the principles upon which the constitution shall be constructed that the word "powers" in connection with the expression "powers and privileges and territorial rights" might be omitted altogether. I dread dealing with the expression "territorial rights" as it may imply the taking from the people of New South Wales that territory which lies in such close contiguity to other and powerful states and which we may say in all charity and in the mildest possible form they possibly covet. I have no doubt South Australia would like an adjustment of territorial boundary in order to take in Broken Hill. We have heard-and the idea comes from the preaching of the Victorian press and Victorian statesmen-that an equal adjustment of territorial rights might be taken to mean [184] the annexation of Riverina to Victoria and equally the modest colony of Queensland on our north might find that their capital Brisbane might be strengthened to a large extent by a certain portion of the territory of New South Wales down to the Clarence River being merged into Southern Queensland. These are the questions which come before the minds of the people of New South Wales and upon which this Convention will have to be perfectly clear. There must be no surrender of territorial rights in any shape or form save in connection with the reconstruction of states in the future or in connection with the construction of new states. Such division or surrender for the creation of new states should only be by the will and consent of a two-thirds majority of the people. Resolutions 2 and 3 deal with the question of trade intercourse and follow as a matter of course upon the creation of a federation. There can be no federation of these colonies no federal form of government unless there is unrestricted free-trade throughout the whole of the colonies. That goes without saying; and the power vested in the federal government of imposing outside customs duties is also natural and right enough. The two resolutions taken together mean by inference that there shall be unrestricted free-trade between the various parties to the federal government compact but there must be protection against the outside world. We now come to a most dangerous point in connection with the proceedings of this Convention. I hope that the 4th resolution dealing with the question of military and naval defence will receive the most anxious consideration of the delegates. I hope that the words which fell last evening from the lips of the hon. member Sir George Grey - words which bear the weight of great experience - will be taken to heart by those who may form the federal government. The question of creating a standing army is one which to my mind is almost more repulsive than the question of readjustment of territorial boundaries. It means the existence in our midst of a certain number of idle men - men sharpening their knives and their swords for the first fitting opportunity of fleshing them on the people of their own country because we have no other enemies. We in Australia - federated Australia I may take it because the matter is one which applies to the whole - have no enemies within our borders; we have no Indians to dispute with us the possession of the soil; we have no powerful Maori race to fight as was once the case in New Zealand for the territory the right to which belonged to the Maoris themselves. We have no enemies within and the only thing we have to fear is the possibility of any assault on the mother country by her enemies from without unless indeed the creation of a standing army proves a menace to the people of Australia by the existence of an armed force for unlawful purposes. This question of the creation of a military force is one of the blots upon these resolutions. We want no military force within New South Wales. All we want to do is to make every man who is either a native of the soil or one of ourselves by reason of his taking up his residence amongst us prepare to resist possible invasion from without. Who are our enemies? Who are our enemies but the enemies of England and they so long as we remain under the Crown will be dealt with by an outer barrier an outer bulwark in the defence of Australia in the shape of the navy of Old England. But we have no enemies within and there is no necessity to fasten the curse of a standing army upon us. As was pointed out by the hon. member Sir George Grey yesterday in his interesting speech we have no necessity to keep a large standing army at a large cost to the people of the country [185] when we have no enemies with whom they will have to fight. Our own police are quite sufficient for the preservation of order within. In the event of invasion from without so long as we remain under the Crown our enemies being the enemies of England will be dealt with before ever an attempt is made to invade these shores; and when the day of invasion comes the people of this country will rise as one man to defend their hearths and homes from any possible aggressor. I look upon the question of the creation of a military power within a territory under the Crown as a menace to the people who are to continue as British subjects. We have been sent here by our various parliaments to frame a constitution under the Crown-under the Crown bear in mind. That is the idea which has been put forward in every speech that has been made. I presume then that the members of the Convention are prepared at once to give the go-by altogether to the idea of imperial federation. So long as we remain in our present position as individual colonies we are imperially federated and we can be imperially federated in no stronger manner than in connection with our relation to the mother country. We are as much imperially federated as the people living in the cities of London Liverpool Manchester or other large centres of population. We are a portion of the British Crown joined together by the most solemn ties and obligations; and we have to bear the brunt of any misfortune which may fall upon us in connection with any attack upon our shores by reason of our enemies being the common enemies of England. We have already made certain provision partially of a federal character to assist the Imperial Government in the protection of our shores from without; but let us set our faces as a young nation-if I may use the word "nation" in advance-against standing armies; let us set our face once and for ever against the creation of anything like a military despotism. We are met here under the Crown and I must say that as one possessing a slight tinge of republican notions as one who sees that the future of Australia is to be what was prophesied of it fifty years ago by poets who have written of what the future of Australia is to be-having a certain tinge of republicanism in my nature the result naturally of my being a descendant of an Englishman I was surprised to find a gentleman occupying a position under the Crown proposing what 100 years ago would have been simply regarded as high treason. Why the other day the hon. member Mr. Munro made a proposal with regard to one phase of the question which made me ejaculate "One strand of the painter has gone."  Mr. MUNRO:   What was that?  Mr. DIBBS:   The hon. member proposed to take from us as British subjects the chartered right which we possess of appeal to the Crown.  Mr. MUNRO:   I did not. I spoke in the other direction!  Mr. DIBBS:   The hon. member spoke of establishing our appeal court and of doing away with the necessity of appealing to the Privy Council. The hon. member suggested that we should have our appeal court and that there would be no necessity for sending cases to the Privy Council of England.  Mr. MUNRO:   I said the reverse!  Mr. FITZGERALD:   The hon. member said the opposite!  Hon. MEMBERS:   Hear hear!  Mr. DIBBS:   I am very glad to take the hon. gentleman's statement that he said the reverse. I find then that I have done the hon. member an injustice. The reason the matter made an impression upon my mind at the moment was the speech of the hon. member Sir Samuel Griffith who told us with his astute [186] knowledge as a lawyer that his mind was still open on the subject that he was prepared to hear arguments on both sides of the question before making up his mind whether to agree to the establishment of an appeal court. However if I have done the hon. member Mr. Munro an injustice I certainly apologise. But the hon. member Mr. Playford took a more extreme view still. He proposes to take part in the formation of a constitution which will take the right of veto or of approval or dissent on the part of the Crown to our bills away from the Crown altogether. That was clear enough and that brought forth from me the involuntary ejaculation "There's another strand of the painter gone!" And what did I hear from our revered friend from New Zealand Sir George Grey? I heard a proposal of a still more audacious character. He threw out a suggestion for our adoption that we should stipulate for the election of a governor-general to preside over the federated colonies to be elected by the people of those colonies. In God's name what then is to become of the Crown? The matter reminds me very much of the story of "Ginx's Baby." After they had been squabbling about the "territorial rights" of that unfortunate baby until it had been kicked overboard the writer concluded with these extraordinary words "Good God what has become of the baby?" When one hon. member proposes to cut the Crown into mince meat-when the hon. member Mr. Playford would deprive the Crown of its right of vetoing a bill and when the hon. member Sir George Grey would take from the Crown the right of nominating and give us the power of electing our governor-general what is to become of the Crown? What is the Crown to be? Are we to send to the Fiji Islands for a block of wood which they use as one of their gods and set that up in the capital of Australia and say "This is the representative of the Crown without power or right of veto and of our own election"?  Mr. PLAYFORD: What power has the Crown now?  Mr. DIBBS:   If the Crown has no power now what does the hon. member propose to take away? The Crown has the power of vetoing our bills and showed its power last year when it vetoed our Divorce Bill. We are gradually cutting that "crimson thread of kinship"-the words have become historical-we are gradually whittling away the powers of the Crown and creating for the future of Australia what the hon. member Mr. Playford is perhaps anxious to create namely the republic of the united states of Australia. That is I have no doubt what we are coming to. Without poaching from the unprotected preserves of my hon. friend Captain Russell who rather usurped the position which hitherto I have held in this chamber of being the only legitimate quoter of the sacred book I think really that after all "out of the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh." Out of the fullness of the heart of republicanism came the proposal to subvert the authority and dignity of the Crown to cut the last link of connection with the Crown and to establish the republic of Australia. That is what we are coming to and it is the inevitable destiny of the people of this great country. When England sent her pioneers to subdue the wilds of Australia to civilise them and to make "the desert rejoice and blossom as the rose"-when she planted her colonies in this country she planted them with that germ and spirit of independence which must as time rolls on develop into the establishment of a great republic. The cubs of the lion will in due time play the lion's part; and I was intensely amused to find that that young cub South Australia represented by my hon. friend Mr. Play- [187] ford has solved the whole question of converting the authority of the Crown into a myth. What we are doing to-day is preparing step by step for that grand future which is to come; and when that day arrives it will be not to the discredit nor to the injury of England but for England's greater strength and security when she in the southern seas-separated as we are by such a vast expanse-shall have created as foreshadowed by the hon. member Mr. Playford not a dependency but a nation of her own people free and independent of the Crown. That is the boldest way in which to put the question. It was barely touched on before but it was the honest conviction of the hon. member Mr. Playford and the hon. member Sir George Grey who pointed out that the people of this country would no longer especially as time rolls on and develops still further the pluck and independence of the people remain as they are; but that in the future this country must become a nation of itself in alliance with the old country. Will any of us here say that it was to the loss of England that America separated from the control of the parent state or that that event was not in the interest of humanity was not for the benefit of the human race? And will anybody tell me that it will be against the interest of humanity of the British race or of England herself that in due time these colonies shall become one great united Australia as friends and allies of the motherland? That is our future and what we are doing here step by step to-day is laying the foundation of the inevitable which is to come. We talk about making a constitution which is to last fifty or a hundred years. Where shall we be in fifty or a hundred years? I do not suppose that I shall see my hon. friend Sir John Bray fifty years hence sitting in that corner; he might be elevated to the president's chair; or be president of the republic itself. But we are laying the foundation and step by step are following in the lines of a great nation and in due time we shall become what America has become a separate free and independent state. That is what we are gradually doing. We may be to a certain extent working in fog and darkness; but that will be the outcome of the whole question-of all our arguments of all our debates of all the thinking of the people of this country. I am as much in touch with the native-born population of Australia as is any man in the country; and I feel that I express their sentiments when I say that from the germ of liberty implanted within us by our forefathers spring the aspirations which will forbid us to remain bound in alliance except as one friendly nation with another always with that special respect that should be paid to the people of the fatherland. I am afraid that I have wearied hon. members as far as I have gone; but it appears to me that before going again over a little bit of the ground I have said sufficient to show that I shall oppose the military spirit both inside this Convention and outside the walls of this chamber. Whenever I have the opportunity I will do my utmost to cut down the military spirit and to instil into the people of this land a love of their homes and also the necessity of defending them in the only legitimate manner. As the the hon. member Sir George Grey said either yesterday or in his speech the other day at the Town Hall we should educate our people up to all of this and especially in New South Wales where we are giving the people of the country practically a free education-and it should be common to all Australia - we should instil into the minds of our children the necessity for training and as a quid pro quo for that free education we should demand from them a certain amount of proficiency in the use of arms which of itself would lay the basis of a military organisation for the purposes [188] of defence only. When we have done that we should still come nearer to that great future foreshadowed by Wentworth when he spoke not of these colonies being dependencies of any fatherland or motherland-dependencies of any state whatever but when he used words almost equal in eloquence to the peroration of my hon. friend Mr. Fitzgerald last night. When he spoke of "Australasia with flag unfurled-a new Britannia in another world" the idea was uppermost in his mind as a native born Australian-as it is in the mind of nearly every native born Australian now and also in that of those who have cast in their lot among us-that the future of Australia must be "a new Britannia" with her own flag. We have had to repletion the building of castles in the air treated to the prospect of royal courts presided over probably by royal princes where our wealthy citizens shall flock around and enjoy all the pleasures which surround a royal court; but after all when we come to the bed rock we find that the national spirit of the rising generation of Australia is instinct with freedom which will impel our people at the earliest possible moment to form a nation of their own. That is the aspiration instinct and spirit I hope of young Australia and we are here helping that spirit according to the speeches of my hon. friend Mr. Playford and others by building a constitution like that of the United States which is to last 100 years. It appears to me that to use a nautical expression these resolutions are wrong side up. We ought to have begun building our ship by laying the keel I think we have been putting aloft the top-gallant and royal yards without having regard to the structure upon which everything is to depend. We ought to have started by affirming first of all what we propose in the shape of a federal parliament - by pointing out that we would have two houses of legislature. In due time we should have settled among ourselves what powers the senate should have - it is pretty well agreed what the house of representatives should be. We should then have defined clearly and distinctly what the federal rights should be-but we are not doing that we should state clearly and above board what the state rights should be and having done that we should define-and the people of this country will not be satisfied until we do define-the basis of our fiscal policy as being one of the conditions which should follow at the earliest possible moment in the programme. And then as far as New South Wales is concerned we must pay some little consideration as to which city is to be the capital of the future empire. Where is that capital to be? Is it to be in Hobart? Tasmania is out of the field. Is it to be in Western Australia?  An Hon. MEMBER: Yes!  Mr. DIBBS:   We have lent a hand in endeavouring to obtain for Western Australia free and independent government; but no city in that colony is hardly fit to be the capital of Australia. Will the capital be in South Australia? Of course if I put the question to Victorians they will say that the capital should be in Victoria.  An Hon. MEMBER: No!  Mr. DIBBS:   Then they are casting it at once upon New South Wales. I am sure Queensland has no ambition for it. But just one word in all seriousness with regard to the question of the capital. This question will have to be dealt with by this Convention.  Hon. MEMBERS: No!  Mr. DIBBS:   Gentlemen when they say "no" are speaking with a tender sympathy for their own colony.  Colonel SMITH:   Was the hon. gentleman ever in Ballarat? That is the place for the capital!  Mr. DIBBS:   Yes I have been in Ballarat and I do not know a better place to [189] be the capital of Victoria; but we cannot make it the capital of Australia. It is a fit place to be the capital of Victoria but not for the whole of the colonies. I am speaking in all seriousness. I am speaking now for New South Wales. I have veered round from the position from which I started. I stand here as a representative of New South Wales and the people of New South Wales will not lend themselves to any scheme of federation when the question is submitted to them unless first of all the fiscal question be settled-not the details of the tariff but the principle-for it must be clearly defined what the fiscal policy of the great country shall be. But there is the other question upon which the people of New South Wales will require to know the opinion of hon. members namely as to where the capital of this new federation is to be; and it may be worth while to point out that there is one spot alone favoured by nature favoured by the great Creator himself-where that capital should be where if we are to be a naval power the centre of the naval operations should be where nature has planted boundless fields of coal for naval purposes as well as for Australian manufactures where we the parent state have boundless resources and where all the advantages of beauty point to one place on the face of Australia and in favour of which hon. members of this Convention will have to make up their minds before our proceedings close.  Hon. MEMBERS: No!  Mr. DIBBS:   Oh yes. There was a certain man went on a journey between Jericho and Jerusalem. Well the people of New South Wales do not propose to take that journey but to have the road marked out with suitable lights.  Mr. PLAYFORD:   There is a very good road between Jerusalem and Jericho!  Mr. DIBBS:   Yes; but the hon. member knows what became of the unfortunate man who took it. That is one of the questions which it is no use our shirking. Now I speak on behalf of New South Wales because I am sworn to no master but New South Wales; I know no other master but the people of New South Wales. When the day comes it will not be an open question more than the fiscal question; but will have to be settled not so much in the interests of New South Wales as in the interests of the whole of Australia. If we are to go into a federation we must know on what lines we are to go. We must know where the capital city is to be situated.  Sir JOHN DOWNER:   No!  Mr. PLAYFORD:   Let the people who are elected decide that!  Mr. DIBBS:   There is a difference of opinion. Remember that after all we are only here acting without the authority of our masters. Our masters are behind the scenes in all this business. However much we may thrash out this big question our masters and our masters alone will be the people who will settle that question.  Mr. PLAYFORD:   They will settle it when the first federal council is elected!  Mr. DIBBS:   Oh yes! This is the bomb-shell which I kept in reserve: are hon. members prepared to take that question and add it to the resolutions upon which we are to build up our constitution?  Mr. MUNRO:   We are not authorised!  Mr. DIBBS:   I know that. But New South Wales wants to know something about that question. We want unity. We want the river Murray question settled. I would ask my hon. friend Mr. Gillies whether he is authorised to settle the river Murray question?  Mr. ADYE DOUGLAS:   No!  Mr. DIBBS:   But the hon. member would be very glad no doubt to take it as an act of compromise. However whether we are or are not authorised to settle that question we have to face our masters upon [190] the whole questions involved in these resolutions and other resolutions that must be submitted and take my word for it speaking on behalf of the people of New South Wales the question of the capital is one which will weigh enormously with them in giving their adhesion to any system of federation.  Mr. PLAYFORD:   And with the other colonies as well!  Mr. DIBBS:   And with the other colonies I have no doubt. But we are differently situated. History gives us no guide in the selection of a federal capital. In the case of the United States of America it was the result of a compromise. In no other part of the world can I read in history of any place where the question of the federal capital was settled on the lines which the United States adopted. I am very much mistaken if the people of New South Wales which by reason of its wealth its position its resources its population will not claim to have as powerful a voice in that matter as many of the other parts of Australia put together. However these are questions to be settled and I have no doubt that the generous spirit of compromise which has so far distinguished the debates will be extended even to a fair consideration of that question. In due time if no other hon. member takes the lead I shall test the question by proposing it as one of the cardinal points of the new constitution. These resolutions Mr. President will be submitted to a committee and in Committee of the Whole I reserve to myself the right of amending them to the fullest possible extent in the direction of the lines which I have indicated and shall endeavour to the fullest extent to meet the neighbouring colonies in that liberal spirit that federal spirit of compromise which you shadowed forth in your opening address. But I fear that if New South Wales is to be a factor in the new constitution or in the federation there will have to be a generous concession made to her people and she must have at least an equal voice in the discussion. I thank hon. members for bearing with me so long for I fear that I have wearied them; but I have indicated in a hasty fashion my views of the labours which I think this Convention may perform. Its ultimate outcome should be the building up in the future the great and glorious empire of Australia.  Mr. DEAKIN:   First of all I would say to the hon. member Dr. Cockburn that our mission is to frame an adequate scheme for federation.  Dr. COCKBURN:   Not for unification!  Mr. MUNRO:   Just to all the colonies!  Mr. DEAKIN:   The hon. member I take it was not entitled to interpret that phrase in the strict and narrow manner which he has attempted. Speaking for myself what I at all events took as the meaning of the mandate was that while the Australasian colonies recognised that they had not yet reached-and probably never will reach-a condition in which [383] they desired absolute amalgamation they had reached a condition in which they desired a closer union than has hitherto obtained. The hon. member admitting so much contends that this closer union was never on any subject at any time or in any manner to sink what may be termed the individuality of the states; whereas the contention I would maintain would be that while the colonies declared most distinctly and with an emphatic voice which has found its echo in the first resolution moved by the hon. member Sir Henry Parkes that they would not part with their powers of local self-government on all matters with which local self-government was competent to deal. But they were prepared to part with their powers in rotation to certain subjects on which they believed that the interests of each were the interests of all and that the interests of all were the interests of each. They believed that on certain special subjects there were no longer two interests-that there were no longer state interests but only national interests. They believed that on those special subjects it would be possible to safeguard all state interests and to commit to a new parliament to be entitled the federal parliament the power of dealing with particular subjects within certain lines as the people were in reality on those subjects one people with one destiny and one interest. The argument which I have endeavoured to maintain from the beginning of this debate has been that while there are certain state rights to be guarded most of those rights if not all of them can be guarded by the division of powers between the central government and the local governments. The states will retain full powers over the greater part of the domain in which they at present enjoy those powers and will retain them intact for all time. But in national issues on the subject of defence as people who desire to have their shores defended and to see their resources developed by means of a customs tariff and a customs union - on these questions there are no longer state rights and state interests to be guarded in the constitution but the people's interests are one and they call upon us to deal with them as one. Do we need to repeat the commonplaces of every federation speech at every federation gathering and every festive gathering for many years which remind us that we are one people living under similar forms of government that we speak the same language and that we have the same general interests bearing sway quite as much in one part of Australia as in another? Are we to say that while we are here for union and to declare for union we shall never have more union than can be obtained by the maintenance of our separate state rights in every particular; so that it shall not be possible for the union to deal with any question except by means of the states and through the states of which that union is composed? By the resolution that is not intended. Is it to be contended that union upon these particular subjects within this narrow field as it may be termed when compared with the broad field of general legislation is not to be consummated and that we are here to draw up proposals for a constitution which shall not only retain the state rights but retain them in an absolute supremacy? We may feel perfectly certain from the outset that such preservation of conflicting authorities cannot work satisfactorily to the people of the country. Are we now in the very inception of our undertaking to endeavour to create on the one side an irresistible force and on the other side an immovable object? Are we to place within the popular house with all the authority which attaches to those who directly represent the people responsible ministers who are to hold their seats only so long as they can justify their actions to that chamber?  [384]   Mr. PLAYFORD:   The hon. member Sir John Downer does not propose that!  Mr. BAKER:   You are assuming that we are going to have responsible government!  Mr. DEAKIN:   The request of the hon. member Mr. Munro that these questions should be settled first so that we might approach the proposal of the hon. member Mr. Wrixon-knowing exactly what the senate was to be and what the form of government was to be-was refused; and although I admit that it is not settled yet I am prepared to argue as if these contingencies were admitted because they are at least most probable. The resolutions of the hon. member Sir Henry Parkes propose to adopt responsible government; and it is natural to assume for the purposes of argument that they will be accepted until they have been rejected. Therefore if we are to create a house with all the traditions so far as responsible government and its authority is concerned of the representative chambers which exist in those colonies and the mother country and are then to introduce on the other side clothed with equal power a body entirely foreign to the British Constitution and to which there is no sufficient parallel in the Australian colonies we shall be creating at the outset certain conflict and inevitable deadlock.  Sir SAMUEL GRIFFITH:   Why?  Mr. DEAKIN:   I will tell the hon. gentleman why. The popular chamber receives or believes it receives a mandate from the electors to carry a certain measure which we will suppose affects finance; or it may be an ordinary measure but we will take it to be a financial measure. It is carried in that chamber by a large majority; it is sent to the upper chamber which we will take it for the purpose of argument does not represent the people directly however much it may represent them indirectly. The second chamber rejects the measure. The popular chamber through its government passes the measure for the second time and the upper house rejects it a second time. The government advises his Excellency to dissolve the popular chamber in order that they may appeal to their constituents. They appeal to their constituents; they come back with a renewed mandate given perhaps with stronger voice than before directing them to pass the measure. They cannot pass it. They can never pass it because the senate may always stand in the way.  Mr. McMILLAN:   How could that affect a money bill?  Sir SAMUEL GRIFFITH:   Or any other bill!  Mr. DEAKIN:   They come back with a stronger mandate than ever from the country to carry the proposal into law and the second house rejects it again and again.  Mr. CUTHBERT:   But would they do that?  Mr. DEAKIN:   Well if you will make a provision to the effect that they shall not be able to do it if hon. members will propose a means by which we shall see an issue to the conflict we shall be proceeding on proper lines and we shall have something to assist us. But as the resolution at present stands we are to create a second chamber which may defy for all time the will of the people of the country.  Mr. CLARK:   Nobody wants that!  Mr. DEAKIN:   I hope nobody does want it.  Mr. BARTON:   Cannot you make your check apply to all bills as well as money bills?  An HON. MEMBER:   A body without any power!  Mr. DEAKIN:   Hon. members are surely guilty of a fault which they would be only too ready to attribute to myself when I say that this interjection is remarkably extreme. To say that the chamber which you are perfectly willing to endow [385] with the power of rejecting a measure or if it be anything but a monetary measure of amending it at need of negativing for some years the direct mandate of the popular chamber and that you only require them to cease to oppose the popular will when that will has been definitely and deliberately declared-if you say that is not endowing them with power then I say there is not a representative chamber in the world which possesses any power. It is only in a chamber like that of the United States Senate of America which stands so far above the reach of popular opinion expressed through the ordinary channels that such a course of conduct is possible with out a revolution. And why is it possible? It is possible because the executive in that case is separated from the legislature; because the executive is independent of the two chambers and because the people look to the executive to carry out their will as far as administration is concerned. But in the constitution we are about to propose the executive will be mainly in the popular chamber of the legislature and bound to obey the directions of that chamber. Therefore you will have the popular chamber guided by its government and supported by the great majority of the people of this country entering into a conflict with that house which you propose to make the guardian of state rights. I say that those who are taking this course believing they are conserving state rights and conserving the union are to my mind under a most serious misapprehension. I can conceive nothing more antagonistic to the continuance and maintenance of union than to set the bulk of the population their representatives in Parliament and their responsible government in perpetual conflict with an upper house supposed to represent the states. I say that the equal representation which the states demand must be conceded to them that the power which the states require for their own protection must also be conceded to them. What I contend is that it is not necessary in order to obtain the adequate protection of all state rights in order to secure absolute justice to all the smaller colonies to endow the upper house with the power to amend money bills or to pronounce an absolute veto on all bills. There are numbers of gentleman present sufficiently experienced in constitutional government to be able to devise a means by which the wishes of the senate as representing the states should be given all the effect which can possibly be given to them without bringing the constitution to disruption. It is perfectly possible to endow that chamber with the power of revision and review to place them in such relation with their constituents that they may be in time of conflict sent back to them whoever they may be in order to receive from them a fresh and further direction. It may be possible to propose half a dozen schemes with none of which I will at present delay the Committee. It ought to be possible to propose one which should be acceptable to all reasonable men which should endow the senate or states house with all the powers with which a second chamber can be endowed without bringing the progress of legislation absolutely to a standstill-that is to say without rendering it not only possible but probable that legislation will be brought to a standstill. My hon. co-delegates from Victoria have been accused of introducing into this chamber the party conflicts that have been waged in that colony; but we should have been false to our obligations not only to our own colony but also to this Convention if we had not warned hon. members of the rocks upon which we have been nearly shipwrecked. What we say is that to endow an upper house with these exceptional privileges and powers and to provide no means for a solution of their difficulties with the popular chamber is to invite contention [386] and prolong deadlocks. We say at the same time that it should be possible to constitute an upper house so intimately in relation with public opinion and composed of men so highly qualified that it should exercise a very large and salutary power indeed in controlling legislation and in controlling even the executive government. We say that all this is possible and we admit that all this should be done; but what we do say is that this bald proposition of the hon. and learned member Sir John Downer commits us to the other extreme-to the absolute veto to the equal control of money bills which will lead to two-fold discussion of the estimates in the second chamber-which will lead to the discussion of the minutest points of the administration of the executive government in a chamber to which that government is only indirectly responsible. If you are about to make this change you should go further. You should either not make this change which is out of harmony with our existing institutions and cannot be brought into harmony with a constitution in which there is responsible government rooted in a popular chamber; but if you do take this step you should at once and boldly adopt bodily those foreign constitutions to which you have gone for precedents. If you want the Swiss Constitution take the Swiss Constitution; if you want the American Constitution take the American Constitution; but do not attempt to mix them with the British Constitution.  Mr. BAKER:   Why cannot we have an Australian constitution?  Mr. DEAKIN:   I have not the slightest objection to having an Australian constitution; but an Australian constitution that was begun by   setting aside the political experience of the civilised world would have a poor chance of doing any good. Any constitution that is built up must be built on the experience gained of other constitutions in other parts of the world.  Mr. BARTON:   To what experience of federal constitutions is the hon. member appealing?  Mr. DEAKIN:   I am appealing in the first instance to the fact that there are radical distinctions between the American Constitution and those of these colonies. The radical differences are that in America the executive is separated from the legislature; that the two chambers and the executive work all three independently; that although the whole three are often if not at war entirely at issue there is provision for carrying on the government notwithstanding. There is no such provision in the constitution which is sketched here. Here your responsible government is to be made responsible to the representative chamber.  Mr. BAKER:   We have not agreed to responsible government yet!  Mr. DEAKIN:   It is in this sketch; and if hon. members depart from the sketch let them do so on rational grounds. If they are about to take a new constitution let them take one of which we have some experience and not a hybrid-something from the Swiss something from the British and something from our own. They are taking irreconcilable elements that cannot be made to work in harmony. If hon. members desire to adopt the Swiss Constitution let them adopt it. There they have no dissolution of the popular chamber the government is elected from the two chambers and the system forms a consistent whole. It may be worthy the consideration of the Convention whether we should or should not adopt that consistent whole. It may be worthy of consideration whether we should not adopt the American Constitution with perhaps a little amendment. But what I wish to say in answer to the hon. and learned member Mr. Barton is that to introduce the American Senate into the British Constitution  Mr. BAKER:   It is not proposed! [387]   Mr. DEAKIN:   There would be an inevitable conflict. Either the responsible government and the popular chamber must rule as in most English-speaking countries or the senate of state nominees must rule as the senate in most respects practically rules in the American republic. We should beware of combining irreconcilable elements and should not seek to import into this British Constitution a portion of another constitution and expect it to work smoothly. Our experience teaches us that the dangers which we have run in the past have arisen entirely from the fact that we have created upper houses that claimed more authority than was their due and have endeavoured to exercise it. The propositions which my hon. colleague has submitted are not propositions which any hon. member can honestly say take away too much from the senate of this country.  HON. MEMBERS:   Oh oh!  Mr. DEAKIN:   They propose that the senate shall have equal power with the house of representatives in respect of all bills except money bills so that in every other matter that comes before the senate it stands as well equipped for dealing with legislation as does the popular chamber. There should be a tribunal to which it would not be too difficult to appeal in case of differences between the two houses on those measures; but allowing that to pass my hon. colleague excepts from the control of the senate money bills bills dealing with customs and excise and the annual appropriation bill. He does not say these may not be rejected but he says that they must not be amended; he believes that the second chamber should only exercise its power with regard to money bills in such extreme cases as those in which it will be prepared to reject the whole proposal put before it but should not meddle with the financial affairs of the country by entering into the details of those proposals. The 2nd resolution says:  The act of union shall provide that it shall not be lawful to include in the annual appropriation bill any matter or thing other than the votes of supply for the ordinary service of the year.  What this means is that every money bill which may be a bill involving a question of policy shall come to the second chamber independently and the second chamber shall if it please be entitled to reject that measure to challenge the opinion of the country upon it and to say that until the opinion of the country is pronounced that measure shall not pass into law. Are not these large and sufficient powers?  Mr. ADYE DOUGLAS:   No!  Mr. DEAKIN:   If not show us how we may broaden them without taking the perilous leap to the other side of the stream proposed by the hon. and learned member Sir John Downer. Surely there is some via media between the gift of these excessive powers and that of powers which should be sufficient without making the senate equal with the house of representatives by clothing it with the same authority although it has not the same mode of election nor the same constituents at its back. Surely there is some via media to be found. Because we think the upper houses in our own states do not possess sufficient powers-that the new senate should possess more powers than the upper houses of our present states possess-and because we believe that state rights ought to be protected: surely we will not go to the other extreme and say that the senates are to be all in all and the majority of the population no matter how great is to be capable of being ignored on all questions of policy and the smallest detail on the annual estimates of the year.  Mr. BAKER:   No one proposes such an absurdity!  Mr. DEAKIN:   It could be done. [388] What we ask the hon. member who says that it is all absurdity is to join with us in drawing a constitution that shall prevent that absurdity. He cannot deny that the amendment proposed by the hon. and learned member Sir John Downer admits of the possibility-I say it admits of the probability if not the certainty-of that absurdity. I believe we are all at one in the object we seek to gain which is the efficient protection of state rights and surely they can be efficiently protected without allowing the senate to enter into the consideration of every £10 which it may be proposed to spend on a post-office or every £5 increase of salary proposed to be given to a civil servant. Surely there are a number of questions which can be dealt with by the popular chamber without trenching on state rights. Will the hon. members who consider that these proposals of the hon. and learned member Mr. Wrixon do not give sufficient power to the second chamber join us in endeavouring to frame a constitution which shall give them sufficient but not absolute power-which shall say as the hon. member Sir John Bray said in his most carefully reasoned-out speech that "In the last resort and after the fullest consideration and delay the will of the majority must rule" I will they admit that cardinal principle?  Mr. BAKER:   We have always admitted that!  Mr. DEAKIN:   Well if hon. members admit it will they take care to provide for it because it is indisputable on the face of it that the proposal of the hon. member Sir John Downer allows the minority to rule in everything if they please. We all know that minorities as well as majorities will be composed of reasonable men and that what I suggest is not likely to take place frequently; but it is not our province as the hon. member Mr. Gordon said to rely too much on good-feeling without other guarantees. We must draw a constitution that is fair upon the face of it and to be fair on the face of it it must provide against any abuse of authority by a minority. If the hon. member Sir John Downer will join us in providing against the abuse of power by a minority I believe he will find every member of the Convention with him. Let him give the states all just power but let him for once protect the nation. Let us not frame a scheme of government expressly designed to provide for the rule of the minority instead of that of the majority. If we are all agreed on that principle we can soon arrive at an agreement; but in its present form it is certain that Sir John Downer's proposal goes too far. Let us see if we cannot find a means of protecting state rights and the rights of the majority of the nation at the same time.  Mr. McMILLAN:   I think most hon. members will agree with me that the atmosphere which has predominated here since the beginning of our business has been an atmosphere of compromise-compromise as long as we do not give up any vital principle. It seems to me that we ought instead of getting into the absolute corner indicated by some members at the present time to try and go step by step and see whether there is a possibility of agreeing and whether even if with our apparent disagreements upon principle there may not be some machinery that can be adopted say in a select committee which may practically bring about what members on both sides of the question require. I find a little ambiguity in the amendments of the hon. member Mr. Wrixon. I should be willing to allow the first amendment to go to a select committee with one alteration. It reads:   The senate shall have equal power with the house of representatives in respect to all bills except money bills bills dealing with duties of customs and excise and the annual appropriation bill and these it shall be entitled to reject but not to amend. [389]   I should be willing to leave out money bills and make it read thus: The senate shall have equal power with the house of representatives in respect to all bills except bills dealing with duties of customs and excise.  Mr. DEAKIN:   Leaving out the annual appropriation bill?  EIGHTH DAY'S DEBATE.  Debate resumed on resolutions proposed by Sir Henry Parkes (vide page 23).  Sir HENRY PARKES in reply:   In my first words if I may venture without offending the sense of self-respect I would offer my most unqualified congratulations to the distinguished men some of whom have come from so great a distance to attend this Convention. I think I may fairly congratulate hon. gentlemen on the close adherence to purpose the lucid statement the absence of all collateral issues and the sense of public duty which have characterised the speeches in this debate up to the present time. If there is any exception to that high rule of debate I know that what I have to say this morning will have nothing to do with it. I shall brush it away as I would a cobweb or any other offensive substance which obscured the light. We are not assembled here to bandy words about the site of the federal city; we are not here to prescribe a federal tariff; and we might just as well speak of determining the organisation of the federal army or of fixing its headquarters. We are here for one single object which has been defined at every stage throughout our proceedings and that object is to lend our assistance one to another as best we may to frame a scheme for the constitution of a federal government. I think that is the only object to which we can properly give our attention and it gratifies me beyond measure that there has been such a consistent adherence to the consideration of it. I think the seven delegates from the youngest colony deserve our special attention. They have travelled a journey which would have deterred most persons from entering upon it even a score of years ago and they came here at the earliest opportunity to assist us. I also think that the prime minister of that young colony the Hon. John Forrest deserves our special congratulations on the frank manly speech be made to us and the broad spirit of sympathy with our object which inspired that speech; and I think if I might go on without making some invidious distinction that there are several other hon. gentlemen who specially have contributed valuable assistance to us in the debate which has taken place a debate I venture to say which in its lofty character and its fruitful contribution to the end we have in view must be gratifying as well as satisfying to every mind amongst us. Now I am not going to travel far in a direction such as that I have ventured upon; but I will endeavour to deal with the object we have in view in the light of the very instructive debate which we have so far had upon the subject. I was very sorry to hear one or two of the Western Australian delegates express a kind of reserved intention that their colony might not enter into this federation. I think something might be said for the sacrifices that must be made by the larger colonies as well as by the smaller; and I think it is right [314] after what has been advanced on the part of others that I should endeavour in the fewest possible words to state my view of the position which the colony of New South Wales occupies in this Convention and in the prospect of the work which we are anxious to join in consummating. If by any chance and I do not disguise from myself that there is that chance the disaster should fall upon us of coming to no agreement I for one feel that New South Wales can afford to stand alone as well as any colony of the group. Our position is this: At the close of last year we had a population of 1170000 souls and what is of much more importance the elements of that population were of that character that our progressive increasers assured against that of any of the other colonies. For example the percentage of our increase during the last twenty years was 30.15 as against the next highest that of Victoria 22.61. We then have a population which has proved itself full of resource and which has the element of increase in a higher degree than that of any population of any other colony of this group. Last year we had a revenue of £9063397. In point of private wealth probably the most subtle and the most convincing test of all of a nation's happiness we stood ahead of all the colonies and ahead of the civilised world. What I mean so that there shall be no mistake is that if the private wealth which is considerably over £400000000 were distributed over every unit of the population it would give us if every person including the person who has not £5 or 5s. had an equal distribution of this wealth a higher degree of private wealth than that possessed by any other Australian colony and a much higher degree of private wealth for the units of the population than that possessed by any nation in the wide world. Our private wealth would give to each inhabitant the sum of £366. Now the next colony-that of Victoria-does not nearly approach that sum. If we go to the great nations of the world-and I will take three of them-the private wealth of the United Kingdom only gives £249 per inhabitant; the private wealth of France only gives £218 for every inhabitant; the private wealth of the United States only gives £240 for every inhabitant. Then we have still unalienated and not even in the process of alienation land amounting to 152282034 acres and with that boundless wealth which I state is the result of our civilised society we have our vast mineral wealth combining illimitable coal-mines and illimitable mines of iron and we have our other great resources which I have not time to dwell upon and to crown all we have only the responsibility of 700 miles of coast out of 8500 miles. So that if we do not come to any agreement and we have each to pursue the path of separate nationhood we have no fear of holding our own. I think it is quite right that I should state this much as to the position of New South Wales because circumstances may arise which will render it impossible for New South Wales to enter into this federation. I for one as I have testified am full of zeal for this federation; but I must remember that there are sacrifices which if they cannot be made by a small population certainly cannot be made by a large population. We cannot consent to be tied or linked inseparably to any body of states which manifest a selfish desire not to deal in an equitable and just spirit with the whole federation. Having said this much and said it I hope in no mincing terms I trust I shall not be misunderstood as lacking in any degree in zeal to bring about this federation; but for it to be entered upon-and it cannot be entered upon except with the free consent of the free people of these colonies-for it to be entered upon with any prospect of success the people of [315] the large colonies as well as the small must be secured in their inalienable rights. Now I am tempted at the risk of possibly being accused of performing an unnecessary task to ask what really is government? Government I apprehend on any just honest not to say any philosophical basis is a contrivance which is found necessary in a community of men to protect their rights and property and their liberty to enforce their laws and to repress crime; and whatever form this government assumes the true principle is to call upon the people for whom this government is necessary in the form of taxation for just such sacrifices as may be necessary to support it. I am one of those who hold it to be a fundamental wrong to impose burdens upon a free people for any purpose whatever than the purpose of sustaining necessary institutions under a settled government; and in that case the taxes should be raised in the manner most consistent with liberty the manner which will least interfere with the free actions of the citizens and the manner which will be least oppressive as a pecuniary burden. Now in these colonies we have to all intents and purposes the institutions of government as perfect as in any part of the world. I do not admit that the government of England is more perfect than ours or that it works more to the advantage of the people. I certainly do not admit that the government of the American states is more perfect than ours or that it works more to the advantage of the people of that great commonwealth; and certainly I cannot admit that the government of any European state is more perfect than ours. If then we wanted merely government we have it in a form corresponding with that with which we have grown up from the cradle which we have learnt to venerate and which has worked efficiently and well for the good of every section of our population. Why then it may be asked by some but not by many I should think do we seek to create another government? I shall endeavour in a few words to answer the question I put. We seek to create another government because we have arrived at a time when we have found by many telling circumstances that these separate governments however efficient and satisfactory they may be in working out the internal affairs of the respective colonies are not adequate for the larger duties which now devolve upon us as an Australian people. I will endeavour to point out how it is that these governments cannot work out the destiny of Australia from the point at which she has arrived by her own enterprise her own foresight her own industry and her own never-failing energies. There are a number of things which no one of the separate governments can by any possibility do and those things are amongst the highest objects of government. The separate governments cannot by any possibility efficiently conduct the defence of these Australian colonies. It is no use for me to attempt to argue this subject because I apprehend that gentlemen around me will readily admit it. The ground has been gone over frequently. It has been gone over by men possessing an intimate knowledge of the subject and a very forcible and lucid power in explaining that knowledge; but I may be pardoned the assertion that it is simply impossible for the defence  Mr. FYSH:   No point was made of it!  Mr. GILLIES:   Certainly; by several speakers!  Sir THOMAS McILWRAITH:   Nobody made a point of it!  Sir HENRY PARKES:   I am willing to defer to my hon. friend in almost everything; but perhaps he will allow me to judge how far it was made a point find how far it was not. The point I meant is the contention that ministers should be so selected and as I understand it that provision should be made by law that they should be taken from each of the colonies. That is utterly inconsistent with parliamentary government as we know it. Now what has been the course in later times in the best times of English history in the formation of a ministry? The Queen or in a colony the Queen's representative sends for a person to form a ministry. Whom does she send for? The Sovereign sends forth the person who by his standing in political life by his experience by his character by the degree in which he is trusted by his political friends and by his proved capacity is most likely to secure a body of capable men to serve the Crown. He having accepted this task is absolutely free to make what choice he likes and naturally he chooses the men whom experience has taught him are most likely to assist him in a capable administration of affairs. If he were compelled to take three four or five colleagues of whom he had no knowledge I can only say that no man of high spirit and clear discernment of his duties would accept the office. It would be impossible. How could the administration of affairs be conducted under our form of government unless it was conducted by men who each in the other had the completest confidence? I am quite sure that no single man amongst the high minded men who are the leaders of the English nation would undertake the formation of a ministry subject to any restriction of that kind imposed by law usage or otherwise. It would be simply impracticable. Then as to the government being responsible to both houses suppose this state of things arose: that the senate passed a resolution of want of confidence and suppose the house of representatives met it by a vote of confidence how then is that government to be responsible? I think that the more we depart from the broad lines of the English Constitution developed as it has been during the reign of the present Sovereign the more certain we are to fall into sloughs of despond-into many dangers. With regard to the construction of this senate it is proposed even in these resolutions to give to the colony of Western Australia with its 45000 people the same representation that is given to New South Wales with its 1200000. Surely that is a vast concession and that is given entirely in order to harmonise those incongruities which are admitted which are admitted with sympathy but which must exist until the progress of time and the progress of the colony may emancipate that particular colony from that region of incongruity. I should not object to meeting the smaller colonies especially Western Australia by giving her for a time larger representation in the house of representatives; but that must be limited.[322] There must be a time when her growth will render it unnecessary. But prepared as I am as far as I can to make some anomaly in the constitution we are about to construct merely to meet the case of Western Australia-anxious as I am and anxious as I believe my colleagues all are to have the young colony amongst us-if she cannot see her way to join us without calling on us to make sacrifices inconsistent with our clear duty unhappy as it may be felt it would be best for her to wait for a time to enter the federation. But I trust we shall not come to that. I trust some concession may be made quite consistent with our adherence to the principles which ought to pervade our work by which she can join is. I am aware that outside these walls at any rate there is a feeling that we ought to wait; that the time has not yet come. I can only repeat what I have said in other places and what I have uniformly said that if we are not ripe for federation now it is incumbent upon those who tell us so to name the hour and day when we shall be ripe. If we miss this particular opportunity every year that rolls over us will make the difficulties greater; if we miss this opportunity every experience that is before us "Will abundantly prove that we have not risen to a just sense of the magnitude of our duties. These difficulties which our separate existence have imposed will go on increasing. They can only have one crop of fruit; they can only produce antipathy disunion aggression reprisal widespread discontent and if they are suffered to go on civil war. That is a prospect which no man of just mind can contemplate-that these colonies sprung from the same stock possessing the same great inheritance of equal laws and all the riches of science which have been achieved and stored up for us in the mother country-that we side by side instead of living in brotherhood and amity should live in constant irritation and hostility. Either we must join hands or we must hold out our hands in defiance of each other. In the very nature of things we cannot be divided and be one. In the very nature of things we cannot submit to causes of irritation causes of infliction causes of dissatisfaction causes of exasperation and still live in brotherhood. It is only by joining hands in good faith as the people of one kindred; it is only by giving and taking by entertaining compromise as far as compromise can be entertained without deadly injury to principle-it is only by doing that we can hope to found this union. If the gentlemen around me are actuated by in earnest desire to effect this union it will be effected. If we unfortunately miss this great occasion and leave the work undone it will be done in a few years hence not many years and it will be done by younger hands who will gain the great credit of having effected this bond of union which will be in itself if rightly effected of more value than any other achievement in the history of this continent. I would ask hon. gentlemen when we go into Committee not to dwell much upon these resolutions. They are not worth it. They were submitted as gentlemen will recollect in order to raise that most instructive debate which we have listened to. They have answered their purpose and that debate I venture to predict will form a notable passage in the history of Australia; and whatever becomes of the present immediate movement this debate will have effect upon the cause of federation until it is consummated. But I would suggest that the wisest practical course for us to take will be as soon as possible to agree upon what may be called the vital provisions of this bill-that is the provision as to the construction of the federal parliament the provision as to the construction of the federal executive the provision as to the representation of the smaller states and such other provisions as involve the rigid [323] difficulties between the different delegates. If we can once agree to these provisions it appears to me that a committee of such men as we have amongst us could frame a machinery to give harmonious effect to them in four-and-twenty hours and our work would be done. But I would suggest as a practical aim that we try in open convention to agree upon those which I will call the vital provisions of this bill. I have no time-and I do not think it is very fitting that I should indulge in anything of the sort-I have no time to talk of this question of republicanism which has been so ungraciously launched amongst us. I want to know where in all history you will find any instance where a people have revolted and chosen a new form of government when they were contented with the old form?  Mr. MUNRO:   And had no grievance!  Sir HENRY PARKES:   The very parent of the erection of new governments is some cause of grievance which everybody feels. We feel none so far as the home Government is concerned. And have we such encouraging examples in the republican forms of government in different parts of the world that we should be seduced from that of our own which has stood the shocks of revolution and the social earthquakes of the last fifty years and never been shaken? Why so beloved is our Sovereign in that great offshoot of the English nation the United States that I venture to say if Queen Victoria by any possibility could visit the United States she would receive a grander and more enthusiastic reception than ever was awarded to man or woman before. I venture to say that amongst the potentates of the world including their own President there is none more widely respected more widely revered by all the best minds of the great American commonwealth than the beloved Queen under whom we live. I go further than that. I contend that the woman who sits on the English throne stripped of all her royal robes and all her royal pendants is no common woman in the administration of affairs; that she has disclosed a genius for government a close attention to business and a keen foresight which have never been equalled by any monarch known to history; and that she has above all thing disclosed all amazing insight in her dealings with every constitutional difficulty that has arisen. Beyond this if we even dwell for a moment on the expenses of monarchy they are nothing to the waste of wealth in every presidential election in the United States. The wealth withdrawn from the ordinary channels of trade and commerce and withdrawn from private fortune in every great contention for the presidential chair far exceeds any extravagance that may be supposed to exist in supporting the monarchy of England. But I hold this as a principle in human affairs that no well regulated mind no mind that rises to the exigencies of any occasion when that occasion presents itself will ever anticipate what is in the far future. If a time should come when it would be necessary to sever the connection with the mother country it will come as it came in America in spite of the loyalty in spite of the good feeling of the chief men of the time. It will not come to meet the wild ravings of some person who may call out "republicanism" without the slightest knowledge of what he is talking about. Sufficient for the day is the government thereof. We have a government of which we ought to be proud and it is neither the part of loyalty nor is it yet the part of common-sense to be anticipating something which may come in the dim future when all our attention is occupied-necessarily occupied-with that which we posses and that with which we are satisfied. I would ask the hon. gentlemen who have at such great sacrifices come here to endeavour to take the course which shall [324] be as free as possible from all collateral issues. This is no time for glowing periods; it is no time for rhetorical flights; but it is a time for hard and steady work in trying to do what we are called here to do and I would ask hon. members to do their utmost by a calm self-suppression by a close attention to the object which has brought us here by mutual respect mutual forbearance and a disposition to compromise where compromise is possible to assist each other in bringing about this great work; and I would say that if we seize the occasion and succeed in doing the work we shall have not now so vividly as hereafter the blessings of this and succeeding generations on what we have accomplished. I now beg to move:  That the Convention resolve itself into Committee of the Whole to   consider the resolutions in detail.  Question resolved in the affirmative.  Mr. DEAKIN (Victoria). -    Without attempting to follow the honorable member (Mr. Gordon) through the many flights of oratory with which he has charmed us and with the breadth of criticism which he has offered on all the issues involved I rise for [39] the purpose of submitting a few considerations trusting that they will be of some service in the settlement of this issue. I propose to take advantage of this amendment to consider for a moment it is an inter-colonial traffic. The points of arrival and departure of the river traffic are very rarely in the same colony. The traffic of the Murray and its tributaries is therefore in its essence inter-colonial and one would therefore suppose that it was properly open to and required federal control. The first broad question we have put is answered since the facts of the case point naturally in the direction of the propriety of conferring upon the Federal Government at all events a power of control over what is practically the federal and inter-colonial navigation of the interior. That is prima facie a most reasonable demand and would require to be rebutted by important considerations of expediency if it were put aside. The next question is that since the traffic is inter-colonial and cannot be efficiently dealt with except by inter-colonial agreement or inter-colonial legislation-   Mr. MCMILLAN. -    Is it possible to define "navigable"?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I think so. There is a great body of decisions in the United States where the Federal Government have control of navigable streams that settles by means of particular instances a certain number of principles which would allow of the determination of the question as to where a river begins and ceases to be navigable.   Mr. BARTON. -    It must also be remembered that there is a great quantity of water there.   Mr. REID. -    Are navigable rivers mentioned in the Constitution?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    No commerce is mentioned and naturally that is only affected where the river is navigable. While it is perfectly true that the rivers which were in the mind's eye of the framers of the American Constitution were the noble streams of the eastern states it is well to remember that federal laws now apply equally to all the rivers of the west in the great republic. There the physical conditions are similar to ours. There are immense areas of arid country with streams having an intermittent flow.   Mr. BARTON. -    The framers of the American Constitution had no thought of that when they passed the provision with regard to the regulation of commerce.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    That is the case. It was then only necessary to consider the utilization of water for navigation and the question of irrigation was not in view. We have now to deal with a different set of circumstances. But the word "navigable" is largely defined in various American decisions and therefore it might if necessary be readily defined for the purposes of our Constitution. I was about to leave that branch of the subject with the simple statement that it seems natural desirable and proper that what is really inter-colonial intercourse upon our rivers should be under federal control. Another question was touched upon in one very important aspect by the honorable member (Mr. Gordon) in his finished and elaborate discourse. That was the relation which this traffic upon inter-colonial streams bears to the railways of the colonies. He only considered it in a single aspect. He said if it would be undesirable in [40] a federal state to permit a continuance of a war of railway rates it would be equally undesirable to permit of a war of rates as to river-borne produce. But there is another consideration that has been pressed upon the consideration of the Finance Committee and the whole of this Convention by the evidence which the late Mr. Eddy gave before the Finance Committee in Adelaide. It would lead me too far afield to refer in detail to that evidence but it will be found on pages 160-163 in the report of the proceedings of the Convention in Sydney. It was there published for the first time. Although Mr. Eddy hesitated to say that the Federal Government should seek to take entire control of the river-borne traffic because it is in private hands and that would mean a serious interference with private trade and business yet all his arguments went to support the contention which he in one part of his evidence admits that some control is decidedly necessary in the interests of the railways and also in the national interests. He points out that railway rates in many parts of the interior are determined by river rates and that those river rates are open to very great alterations which defeat all possible calculations by the railway authorities as to the returns in any given year from any given rates. He points out that it is undesirable that this state of things should continue either in the interests of railway traffic or national interests. He seemed to think not only as a railway man but as a citizen of these colonies that it is essential if railway charges are to be subject in any degree to federal control if the rates of carriage are to be fixed in any way by federal authority that the aim of such control would be incompletely fulfilled unless power of some kind were given over the charges upon traffic which passes in competition with the railways not along other railways but along the natural water-courses of the country. The State has spent large sums in keeping there water-course open for the longest possible period in each year. If the railway rates are to be in any degree subject to federal control while this disturbing element remains it will be a task of almost insuperable difficulty to fix them in those regions.   Mr. FRASER. -    It will not be more difficult than at present.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    The honorable member knows the great advantage which the competing railway and river rates confer on growers of wool who can avail themselves of them. I can understand that it is an undesirable suggestion that there should be harmony between these rivals from the point of view of the producers. I only wish to point out that in addition to the many considerations so ably put by the honorable member (Mr. Gordon) one most important consideration is the effect of these water carriage rates upon the railway rates and their effect upon the revenues of individual colonies or of the Federal Government. When we refer to the control of this great river system or any similar system in Australia for the purposes of navigation we find ourselves confronted by the necessity if the opportunities which these systems offer to us for the commerce of the interior are to be fully availed of for constructing works upon those rivers which must far surpass the powers and resources of even the richest colony of the group. Many of these works must be undertaken outside the limits of any particular colony. Our rivers differ from the superb systems of the eastern states of America inasmuch as they are often shallow and intermittent although liable to great floods. To secure a regular and even flow for the longest possible period during the year regulating works would be necessary which would extend from high up near the sources to their very mouths. In South Australia a proposition has been considered which would involve a very extensive deepening of the mouth of the River Murray that would [41] improve the navigation so far as it would tend to admit larger vessels into the river system but it would also tend to injure navigation by diminishing the duration of the period within which navigation is possible because it would make the escape of the waters of the river to the ocean freer and would tend to empty the river at an earlier period than at present.   Mr. HOWE. -    We did not make that proposition.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    It has been proposed and if the question of navigation is to be dealt with it ought to be considered.   Mr. SYMON. -    If such a work were ever carried out it would have to be a federal matter.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I am leading up to that. Whilst that work is desirable in the interests of navigation in one aspect it is not desirable in another aspect unless it is accompanied by additional works. The proposals which have been before the Government of New South Wales to deal with that great tributary of the Murray-the Darling-involving the construction of locks along that river-would have to be extended until they embraced the Murray itself. They would have to deal with the whole of the system from the mouth upwards so as to bring the river at proper intervals under the control of a system of works which while allowing fuller access to navigation would prevent the free escape of the waters to the sea. I merely mention this as an indication of the gigantic works which will be necessary. Not gigantic in cost in comparison with those undertaken in America at the head of the Mississippi and Missouri but gigantic when viewed from the Australian stand-point; yet an expenditure which is absolutely necessary if that river and its tributaries are to be put to their best possible use for the purpose of developing the interior commerce of Australia. It would be equally necessary to cope in some way with the extraordinary floods to which this great system is liable. They can only be dealt with in the higher parts of the stream by a system of diversion or storage or of diversion and storage which might enable the level of the river to be maintained for a longer period than at present regulating its flow and at the same time affording an opportunity during a season of plenty to retain waters which would be of inexpressible value in seasons of dearth. If you once look at the question as I am asking the Convention to look at it from the natural physical stand-point the desirability of a federal control of what is practically federal commerce by an expenditure upon works which must be federal to preserve navigation you are brought face to face with the other question introduced by my honorable friend. This relates to the immense possibilities within the limits of the water supply which are afforded for the development of agriculture in the interior by means of irrigation. This was dwelt upon by the honorable member (Mr. Carruthers) in Adelaide with great force with great effect and with no whit of exaggeration. He detailed to us some of the brilliant results which had been achieved in the interior of New South Wales by the construction of simple dams or weirs for the preservation of part of the waters which now flow to waste. There is no doubt that in the future New South Wales and Victoria in pursuance of their policy of development are likely to increase the number and scale on which such works are executed. Hence the consideration of works for navigation has brought us face to face with the necessity from the irrigation stand-point of constructing other works on the same streams. Thus we find that the problem of irrigation becomes inextricably intertwined with the problem of navigation and that the interests of one must be studied in connexion with the interests of the other. The interests of both can best be dealt with [42] in common and I venture to submit from the irrigation stand-point-the stand-point which impressed the honorable member (Mr. Carruthers) and other representatives of New South Wales-that we have yet to learn that these two interests are necessary antagonistic. We have yet to learn that it would not be possible by a federal system dealing with this river from its source to its mouth to provide as much navigation as would be required consistent with what I in common with the representatives for New South Wales take to be the first consideration in connexion with the river and that is the distribution of as much of its waters as can be regularly or periodically made available to increase cultivation and settlement on the soil. Why should not those interests go together? There is no insuperable obstacle to prevent their being dealt with jointly. It may be proved from the local point of view that they should be dealt with together in order that the best results may be obtained from both. It may be that to some extent the construction of works on the lower part of the river would be of material advantage to the inhabitants of the remote interior as far as they improve its navigability and means of communication which are offered from the sea into the heart of New South Wales. But putting speculation aside the real difficulty of this question is that there are three parties at present interested namely New South Wales Victoria and South Australia.   Mr. GORDON. -    And all Australia through them.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    Indirectly and remotely no doubt. The Victorian interest is limited and owing to the physical circumstances of the case the Victorian attitude can be impartial in this matter because any gain which we can share in must be general whereas our own interests are pretty well protected by nature and our own past exertions. We need look forward with very little alarm to whatever course is pursued. The difficulty is that New South Wales contains the Darling the Lachlan-the head and body of all these streams-the Lachlan the Murrumbidgee and the Darling.   Mr. REID. -    It holds the whole of them.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I said the whole of them.   Mr. REID. -    No; the honorable member said the body of them.   Mr. GORDON. -    Some of the tributaries of the Darling are in Queensland.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    They are not worth mentioning; they are insignificant. New South Wales holds the whole of those streams and her representatives are placed in the difficult position that they are asked to yield apparently all the concessions which are involved in the acceptance of the federal control of this great arterial river system. South Australia on the other hand which is naturally most urgent for the federal control of this river-any control though partial only being better for them than the entire absence of authority from which it at present suffers in respect of the streams beyond its borders-is in the position of practically making no concession and reaping an immense advantage. Naturally as I pointed out to the honorable member before he spoke his pleas sound as they appear to me are received with some questioning by the representatives of New South Wales when his request although evidently federal in nature and object appears to be all to the gain of his own colony and all at the risk for it is no more than a risk of New South Wales. Victoria as I say is asked to risk comparatively little or nothing by placing these main streams under federal control but New South Wales is certainly asked to risk something; and as it was very fairly put at Adelaide the representatives of that colony view with proper anxiety a request to transfer the absolute control of the main tributaries of a river which they undoubtedly at present possess-which in fact they possess under any and every circumstance unless they choose to yield to appeals [43] which are made to them. They naturally look with some suspicion on a proposal even to share with South Australia the control of these tributaries within their own territory.   Mr. DOBSON. -    But do they possess them in law?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    Personally I think so. If they do not I should like to see the law that could be enforced compelling them to give it up. For all practical purposes I think we may agree however much we may differ as to the reading of their legal rights that the absolute control of the Darling is in the hands of New South Wales.   Mr. DOBSON. -    So as to make the River Murray run dry?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    Suppose that New South Wales did make the river run dry how are you to prevent them? In what court are you to sue them to what code will you appeal or who will enforce the verdict? I do not know.   Mr. GORDON. -    That is the right of the strong man to knock down the little man.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    It may be the right of the strong but it is a strong right as between different nations which we practically are. We are independent of each other and have no more power to enforce on New South Wales the execution of an unpalatable decree in regard to anything in her territory than we have to enforce it on Russia. That fact may just as well frankly be realized. The question is whether this matter cannot be laid before the representatives of New South Wales in such a form that they may see it to be consonant with their duty as representatives and the interests of their colony to consent to the placing of some power in this Bill with regard to the future control of this federal river-of the Murray system with regard to navigation and with regard to irrigation. Let us safeguard if it can be done any special rights which New South Wales may conceive that she possesses. The task I admit is difficult but at the same time we have submitted tasks almost as difficult to the Drafting Committee and if we thoroughly thrash out the main principles without going into the details of this question it may yet be possible to embody either in this clause or if necessary in some more qualified clause which may be placed in another part of the Bill a provision by which when the opportunity arises and when further information has been obtained the complete federal control of this river system can pass to Federated Australia when New South Wales Victoria and South Australia are satisfied that their interests are not to be prejudiced thereby.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    In view of the reasons given by Colonel Home in his report is not the New South Wales scheme for irrigation impossible?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    The report of Colonel Home is only known to me from a very brief newspaper extract and I am not prepared to say yet whether the Government of New South Wales and their people are prepared to adopt that report without qualification or addition.   Mr. GORDON. -    It is confined to the Murrumbidgee only.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I am not even aware of that. What I am submitting is that it appears to me that we are entitled to put to this Convention-that is really to the representatives of New South Wales-the great advantages of every kind likely to be reaped by federal river control-federal control of its trade as preventing competition with the railways federal control of navigation as enabling us to develop it best and federal control of the whole system for the purpose of irrigation. This should prove as it seems to me probable for the greater benefit of all parties concerned in New South Wales. South Australia is called upon practically to make no sacrifice and would reap a gain which is under natural circumstances and apart from state rights certainly due to her. Victoria would yield something and gain something and remain about where she is but New South Wales [44] would have to be satisfied that in yielding to federal control these tributaries which are now within her own control she would also gain. I have detained the committee longer than I proposed. The whole question appears to be the manner in which the representatives of New South Wales will regard this proposal. If they cannot see their way to safeguard the interests of their colony if they cannot see their way with the information before them to accept this proposal at present or some proposal of a similar nature I would urge them to consider whether we could not place a separate clause in the Bill having a contingent effect if necessary so as to provide on the people of New South Wales or their Government being satisfied that the schemes projected by the Federal Government would not be an injury to them that it should be possible for the Federal Government to enter into the federal control of this great system. Some such federal control I believe would be an enormous enrichment to all Australia and would foster the development of the interior.   Mr. MCMILLAN. -    IS the honorable member in favour of the amendment suggested by South Australia?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I am in favour of it as far as making it apply to all rivers for navigation as is proposed by the complete amendment; but as to irrigation I am in favour of it only to the extent I have mentioned.   Mr. MCMILLAN. -    Does the honorable member consider that this sub-section gives absolutely to the Federal Government the ownership of the waters of the rivers?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I have not considered all the proposals of the South Australian Parliament.   Mr. REID. -    It takes the use of the waters without paying the expense.   Mr. BARTON. -    What is the difference between taking away some of our waters and taking away some of our land?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    Exactly.   Mr. KINGSTON. -    But it is not your water.   Mr. MCMILLAN. -    Do the words "the use of the waters thereof" mean the absolute ownership of them?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I think that those are the widest possible words and if they do not convey an absolute ownership confer all the practical title to them. I agree with the honorable member that these words imply most absolute control on the part of the Federal Government. The query put to me by one of the representatives of New South Wales is whether there should be any greater right in the Federal Government to take away her water than to take away her land. The scheme which I am suggesting is not met by that analogy because water unlike land is not a fixed quantity. In Australia it is a very unfixed and indeterminate quantity indeed. It may be possible by perfect regulation of the streams to leave to New South Wales practically all the water which she now enjoys or can enjoy on an unimproved river and yet by means of its improvement while leaving her all that water to give much greater security to navigation and to provide a much larger quantity for irrigation lower down. By putting this river as a whole under federal control it may he possible to satisfy New South Wales that while she loses nothing the community of South Australia and her own residents as far as they are affected by navigation will gain a great deal. I freely admit that-as it is New South Wales that is asked to make the sacrifice upon this subject-the request is one to which I as a representative of Victoria can make no reply. It must be answered by the representatives of New South Wales. But I am appealing to them to recognise the federal aspect of this question-to recognise that federal aspect as far as they possibly can in this Bill without jeopardizing the interests of their own colony; so that when at some future time with more knowledge at their [45] command they or the people of New South Wales can be satisfied that this federal control can be handed over to the Federal Parliament without serious loss to New South Wales it may then be possible for the Federal Government to enter upon the control of this river scheme. That is what I am putting-no unreasonable demand I think; but I feel that because New South Wales is the only colony that is asked to make a sacrifice in this matter and is not yet prepared to make it they should not shut the door on all future federal control of this great arterial system of Australia. It would be an immense gain to the continent as a whole if the river system could be federalized if the federalizing of it could be effected without imperilling the interests of New South Wales.   Mr. DOBSON. -    You speak of this water being in the legal possession of New South Wales. Can you point to any proclamation in which the Crown has given to one colony legal possession of a national river running through all Australia?   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I cannot; and I think I can with safety challenge the honorable member to cite authorities giving any right to any other colony to challenge it.   Mr. BARTON. -    We are granted territories within certain boundaries and one of the boundaries is a river; and unless there is something to show to the contrary the water of that river is ours.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    So I should say unless I can be shown instances where national riparian rights have been recognised between states in regard to a single stream.   Mr. DOBSON. -    I think you would have to show that the Crown granted to one colony the main artery flowing through three colonies. The onus lies upon you to show that.   Mr. DEAKIN. -    I confess to thinking that in discussing the legal aspect we should be opening up a question which however interesting in itself from a professional point of view we cannot pretend to settle authoritatively and the discussion of which would lead to no practical gain. All we can do is to ask the representatives of New South Wales to consider this matter of river control in the most federal light and to urge them to join with us in providing as far as possible if not for the immediate at all events for the contingent federal control of all the river systems of Australia whenever the Federal Parliament may deem that control necessary.   1897 284-287  Mr. DEAKIN:    It is but natural that in addressing an assembly of this description we should be at every turn confronted with memories of its predecessor in these colonies. The Convention which sat in the City of Sydney in 1891 gave a first tentative form to the proposals for federation with which we had been familiar for many years. It is but natural that presence in such an assembly should remain one of the recollections - the deepest recollections-of a lifetime and it is perhaps inevitable that at every stage of the proceedings which we are here witnessing one should be struck with the similarities and differences between the two gatherings. To these even frequent allusions may not be out of place since the aim of both gatherings was the [285] and his adhesion meant a great deal-to the principles of responsible government as exhibited in the British Constitution. From an entirely different standpoint under precisely similar circumstances with very different arguments the present Premier of New South Wales has arrived at exactly the same conclusion; and taking into account the masterful ability of his speech the position he occupies and the influence he rightly wields I believe we shall discover that his speech of to-day presents just such another turning point in the development of the thought of this Convention. It should fix the form of the future Federal Executive and its relation to its Parliament. Another happy parallel in our proceedings has been the unanimity with which the Hon. E. Barton was chosen to fill the high office of Leader of the Convention enjoyed by the distinguished federalist Sir S. Griffith in 1891. Our work is safe in his capable hands. I must confess that the urgency with which the necessity of compromise has been put forward is rather apt to provoke in the minds of many a reflex determination not easily to part with our own opinions or yield to anything like a general flux of thought. I have not yet been able to note any general departure from what I have understood to be the customary modes of thought and opinions of those who have addressed this Chamber but I do begin to feel or think I feel one of those undercurrents of feeling which sway even thoughtful and deliberate minds and cause them to be drawn together by one common influence. My own opinions seem more malleable and more capable of modification than I supposed while listening to speeches which I do not hesitate to say so far as my poor judgment enables me to speak are no whit inferior to those which ushered in the Commonwealth Bill of 1891. Those speeches have been delivered here in accordance with exactly the same procedure as was followed there but have exhibited in many cases an entirely different standpoint-a changed atmosphere an emergence of new points of view. Following speech after speech starting in most cases from different and sometimes from antagonistic standpoints it has become possible to gather what if I understand it aright is the general sense of this Convention on some grave issues which we are called upon to reconsider. recognise that the old problems of 1891 have every one emerged but almost all with new faces. The natural processes of political thought in later years and the discussions which we have listened to here combine together to present these old problems to me at all events in many cases in a new light. Had it not been for this I should not have ventured to trespass upon the limited time that remains to us. If the point of view at which I have arrived be not new to others I may be pardoned for the belief that it is by the presentation even of merely personal views that others may be as I have been largely assisted. In the Commonwealth Bill it was my misfortune to be in the minority and sometimes a small minority on certain important points. On one or two of these points it appears to me that there is a prospect now that I may happen to be with the majority.  Mr. GORDON:    Hear hear.  Mr. DEAKIN:    Nevertheless I would like to clear the way by admitting that were it a question to-day as it was in 1891 of accepting the Commonwealth Bill or postponing Federation even for a few years I should without hesitation accept the Commonwealth Bill. At the same time as this Convention is assembled under a fresh mandate delivered directly from the peoples of the several colonies giving us immediate and direct authority to speak for them to the best of our power I hold myself in no sense bound by any vote or speech in that Convention of 1891.[286] Willing as I am to accept the Commonwealth Bill I recognise the obligation now laid upon us as a distinct obligation to draft the best Constitution possible under the circumstances in which we find ourselves. I had at one time noted portions of those speeches of my predecessors in this debate which most appealed to me with some idea of commenting on them should the opportunity arise but I am about to abandon them because though I am anxious to ex-press my indebtedness to many members for particular arguments on particular points - that personal obligation cannot stand against the general sense of urgency that is upon us to approach after this thoughtful useful and essential discussion the consideration of the details to which we must necessarily give form and shape without further delay. To pass without further preliminary to the first problem which confronted us in the Convention of 1891 in identically the same words in which it is presented to us here I join in expressing with my brother delegates our acknowledgments to Sir Richard Baker for the searching speech in which he followed the opener of this debate. We were confronted with exactly the same problem in 1891 but on that occasion the challenge came from the lips of a member who was rarely heard in that Convention but whose speeches contained the essence of the views of those who agreed with him delivered in classic form and nervous English which few of them could hope to rival. Mr. Hackett on the 12th of March 1891 told us that-Either responsible government will kill Federation or Federation in the form in which we will be prepared to accept it will kill responsible government.I am the more reminded of this because at that time those who like myself differed from the standpoint of Mr. Hackett had the great advantage and satisfaction of having on our side the mature judgment and experience of no less a person than Sir Richard Baker. He had issued a manual which we had in our hands in 1891 in which on pages 44 45 and 46 he expressed his then opinion in regard to the possible forms the Executive of the Federation might assume. He pointed out to us that the Americans were not satisfied with the mode of conducting public business. Hon. members will see what he said on page 44-Some of them have cast longing eyes on England and advocate the introduction of responsible government as the only cure for the evils under which they are suffering.He now recommends for our approval the Swiss form of Executive. Then he was able to say:In the first place we knew very little about it. It is said to work well in Switzerland but even if that is so it would be the rashest of assumptions to conclude that it would work well in Australia.He went on to add:The soil the climate the physical and political environment of Switzerland the history feelings and sentiments of its people are so different from ours and must exercise so important an influence on the working of its political institutions that any conclusions drawn from them is to say the least hazardous. In the past experience has shown that all political institutions which have been lasting are of slow growth; that the ideas and sentiments which give rise to such institutions and ensure their utility must be as it were engrained in the people; and that imported and transplanted exotics have never flourished.I should seek in vain to express in language equally concise and well chosen the objections which operate upon my mind and probably upon the minds of others in regard to the application to our Federal Government of the system of the Swiss Executive.  Sir RICHARD BAKER:    You forget that in the second edition of that book I said I had altered my mind after hearing the objections.  Mr. DEAKIN:    If I had remembered that I would have done the hon. member the justice of stating it but it does not affect the purpose to which I wish to put this quotation where finally he sums up:If the Swiss experiment is to be tried let it be tried somewhere where it will do less harm if it [287] does not succeed; and let us adhere to the system of responsible government under which we have been born and bred and which with all its faults and imperfections has worked at least as well as any other system adapted to Republican institutions.Now whilst we are all aware that the hon. gentleman has changed his opinion and no doubt has in his own mind good reason for changing his opinion it is unfortunate that he did not favor us with a statement of a single reason which has led him to depart from that weighty argument then placed before us. He told us that he favored the Swiss Executive. He might have told us that he admired the beautiful scenery of that interesting country but as to how he proposed to transfer its glacial Alpine heights and acclimatise them upon the sunny plains of Australia he left us entirely in the dark. Consequently I feel justified in sparing the time of this Convention by putting in his own words much better than I can express it what seem to be unanswerable objections to the recommendation which he made to this Convention. In addition to that I might add that as the hon. the Premier of New South Wales indicated this morning we find the ground of choice by no means free and clear for such an innovation. In point of fact those who ask us to accept the Swiss Executive do so forgetting that it would be introduced as an intermediary government above colonies which will preserve responsible government as we have always known it-so far at all events as we can at present judge. The peoples in these colonies have been trained wholly under responsible government and live in those colonies under that form of government having above them the Imperial Government of England based upon exactly the same lines upon the same principles and upon the same traditions. It is actually suggested that between these responsible governments-the Imperial Government above and the responsible governments of the States below-in an Empire which has known no other form of government-we should interpose an entirely novel form with which our people are absolutely unfamiliar. Surely Federation as we know it is surrounded by problems enough and difficulties enough which must be surmounted in order to win the adherence of the people of the several colonies without adding to these sometimes unpalatable proposals this entirely unexpected and to my mind unnecessary innovation of requiring them not merely to vote aye or nay for union but of voting for the union to accept also what is to us an entirely new and untried system of government. Of course the facts are as the authorities upon the Swiss Government remind us that the constitution which in its present form does not date back half a century is slowly changing its form. We are told that their ministers who previously were extremely limited in their departmental authority are acquiring more and more influence. We are told that the inclination to elect the Executive as one whole on party lines is becoming more and more manifest. I may add to those who think to force the Swiss form of government upon this country upon a people politically earnest and politically alert your mere paper constitution would be twisted between their fingers in twelve months back into its present shape. Your Executive would be made answerable as a whole to the electors-  Mr. LYNE:  I should not have attempted to take up the time of this Convention but as I had not the privilege of being one of the Convention in 1891 I deem it my duty to place on record on the present occasion my ideas in the same manner as other gentlemen in this assemblage have done. I take it that the resolutions which have been tabled and which are before the Convention at the present time are intended to elicit from its members their ideas as to what should be embodied in the proposed draft Bill and if that is not so I think those resolutions would absolutely fail in their object and though with the expectation of repeating many of the arguments dealing as I must of necessity with subjects that have already been discussed by other gentlemen I am bound to take the course indicated. I remember-it is now a long time since-when one of the first Conventions was held I think in Melbourne one of its members and a leading member-Mr. James Service-said that the lion in [157] the path as far as the Federation of the colonies was concerned was the fiscal question. It seems to me that has altogether died a natural death as between the colonies.  Mr. HIGGINS:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  If I take the speeches which have gone before I find that the lions in the path at the present time are more than one but the principal is that of State rights. I take it that is to be the trouble in connection with this Convention and next to that the cession of the railways to the Federal Government and last perhaps not least-as I think has been shown by the gentleman who has just resumed his seat-the question of pooling or amalgamating the debts and assets of the various colonies. These three things seem to me to point to the troubles before us in this Convention and I shall attempt as shortly as possible to deal with those matters seriatim. I recognise that the speech just delivered by Mr. Holder is one that has raised many difficulties-difficulties which will be found hard to overcome. But though agreeing with him in some respects I must be allowed to altogether disagree with him in many others; I think the majority of this Convention will disagree with him in many of the statements he has made. First of all he raised the question Mr. HOLDER:  Hear hear. Certainly.  Mr. LYNE:  I come next to the question of States and State rights. Unfortunately I had not the privilege and pleasure yesterday of listening to some of the able speeches delivered but I took the opportunity of glancing through them as reported and I find that the smaller States proposing to enter this Convention have a very great deal to say about State rights. It was an ingenious argument used by Mr. Holder when he said that the smaller States especially in the matter of the franchise had more to consider as against the larger States than bad the larger States against the smaller. I reverse the picture absolutely and assert that the larger States have more to consider in connection with the franchise of the smaller States than was put in the proposition of Mr. Holder. It seems to me that what some of the smaller States representatives want is not only to govern their small States as they are doing now but also to have a very much larger finger in the pie of governing the larger States than they are entitled to. I take it that in this particular the larger States must have the predominant power in the Federation. And if you refer to the history of the creation of the Senate of the United States of America you will find I think that it was not first created as the portion of the Parliamentary machinery which it afterwards became.  Mr. TAYLOR:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  I find that when the originators of the Senate decided to elect that body they were in this position that they had very little scarcely anything to guide them in the formation of their Constitution-a very different position to [158] that we are in to-day-they are groping to a large extent without any guide; and when the Senate was created as it was subsequently created it was mainly as a check upon the great power of the President.  Mr. ISAACS:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  I find that no one in the Convention of 1787 set out with the idea of such a Senate as ultimately emerged from their deliberations. Although it had technically been created as a branch of the Legislature it was thought of as being first a body with executive functions only. And this at first it was. Now that being so if we create a body such as we propose at present we do not take the idea embedded in the minds of the members of the Convention of 1787 as to what the powers of the Senate should be. It is no use talking round this question and shirking the duty which devolves upon us because it would be only wasting time and for that reason I wish to say that I have always as long as I have given the matter a thought been against equal representation in the Senate; and I shall adhere to that unless convincing argument on the other side is used.  Sir PHILIP FYSH:  We might as well go then.  Mr. LYNE:  I should not like Sir Philip Fysh to pack up his portmanteau.  Mr. REID:  He has to stop and finish this contract somehow. (Laughter )  Mr. LYNE:  We had better approach this question in a straightforward manner and say at once what we are prepared to do and what ideas we have upon the subject. In referring to the powers of the Senate as they exist at the present time in America what are those powers supposed to be? They are not equal with those of the House of Representatives. They are described by Bryce in a manner with which I entirely concur. The powers of the Senate I take it should be to:  Correct the democratic recklessness of the House of Representatives and the monarchical ambition of the President.  An HON. MEMBER:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  Another idea of the power of the Senate:  To restrain the impetuosity and fickleness of the popular House and so guard against the effects of gusto of passion or sudden changes of opinion in the people.  An HON. MEMBER:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  It is also given as another reason that:  The propensity of a single and numerous assembly to yield to the impulse of sudden and violent passion is restrained.  I say the Senate in the first place should not be constituted on equal representation. What right has Tasmania to have as strong a power in the administration of New South Wales as New South Wales.  Sir PHILIP FYSH:  What right has Rhode Island to have equal power with Sydney?  Mr. LYNE:  I do not agree with that either. I do not agree with Tasmania having equal power with New South Wales and I question whether it is wise for Tasmania to enter the Federation at all. A few hours ago I was reading a letter appearing in one of the morning papers in which I saw it stated with a good deal of force that the first thing Tasmania should do would be to join Victoria and go in with Victoria as part of the Federation. That may be wise for Tasmania to do.  An HON. MEMBER:  And overpower New South Wales.  Mr. LYNE:  You cannot overpower New South Wales. I do not think it is a wise thing to adhere to equal representation in the Senate provided you are to give the Senate reasonably strong power. If you are to make the Senate a nonentity no harm can be done in giving equal representation but you must do one of two things. You must either give proportionate representation in the Senate or refuse power to the Senate to stop the will of the people. One or the other must be done because where would be the use of having a House of Representatives to [159] spend time in preparing and passing legislation when the smaller Chamber had more power would use it and could absolutely block any legislation which the House of Representatives sent up? I have heard an argument used by many that there should be one Chamber only but I do not agree with that argument either. I am favorable to having two Chambers and the second Chamber should only have the power stated in the above quotations that is not to stop legislation but simply to stay it; and if after a clear demonstration and expression from the people certain legislation is required then the Senate shall be called upon to give way. I read with some degree of pleasure the speech delivered by Sir George Turner wherein he said he was favorable to the referendum in case between the Senate and House of Representatives a deadlock arose. I concur in this expression but not to the extent he did. I think we can devise means by which a crisis may be prevented from having the ill effects a crisis usually has. The method I refer to is what is known as the Norwegian system. My friends of the smaller States will say "If you do that you will overpower the smaller States":  but that can be avoided. The way it is applied in the country to which the system belongs is that when the two Houses are sitting together a measure must be carried by a two-thirds majority; the possibility of a crisis is then alleviated at any rate if not absolutely prevented and the States reasonably protected. Only in important cases that could be laid down with clearness could I agree so far as I am personally concerned to the intervention of the referendum. I do not think after the experience we have had at the late elections the referendum will be so popular as it has been in the past. I look upon it as one of the most conservative measures that can be introduced.  Mr. REID:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  It has been thought by those of the other way of thinking that it was a liberal measure. I think that so far as the late elections are concerned those who call themselves the Liberal Party in the various colonies have been almost wiped out.  Mr. BARTON:  That was no referendum.  Mr. LYNE:  I am speaking of those who call themselves democrats of the Labor Party a party which in New South Wales thought it could dominate any election of the whole people but which has not been able to return a single member of its way of thinking. I say the time has arrived when the referendum will not be so popular as it has been in the past. At the same time I recognise it is a way of getting at the feelings and opinions of the people and that is what I understood the Premier of Victoria so strongly desired when he advocated a resort to the referendum. I take it for instance that in such a case as the alteration of the Constitution and other such seriously important matters the referendum could be brought into play not however till every system that is now used or may be imported into this Bill had been used to prevent the loss and annoyance of a crisis. That being the view I take of it I think the smaller States need not be alarmed that they are to be injured by my proposal to leave the great power in the hands of the people. I read the statement made by Mr. Carruthers that what was desired was unification in the same way as it exists in the British Constitution. I do not think however these colonies desire unification at the present time; they desire I think a system of Federation that will be fair to all parties and they do not desire any system that will be unreasonable and under which some of the larger colonies are going to lose a great deal. I say and I emphasize it that of all the colonies which will lose if loss it may be called for the first few years it is the mother-colony of New South Wales which will lose more than all the other colonies put together.  [160] Mr. PEACOCK:  How?  Mr. DEAKIN:  Gain more.  Mr. LYNE:  I must be permitted to think that she will lose more though Mr. Deakin may think otherwise.  Mr. WISE:  There is one thing-she can afford it much better.  Mr. LYNE:  That may be. If Queensland comes into the Federation and I hope she will be represented here she may say that with her large territory she can afford it much better than New South Wales; but I say New South Wales is going to lose more than all the other colonies put together. I dare say members of the Convention have read the interesting pamphlet published by Mr. Nash on the financial position which I think clearly demonstrates what New South Wales's loss would be. He says further-  If New South Wales is coming into the Federation she will have to be prepared to give a very great deal. And the question is whether she is going to get anything in return.  Mr. HOWE:  She will.  Mr. LYNE:  Probably she will by-and-bye. I know Mr. Barton will say that she is to have all the industries form the other colonies concentrated in Sydney because she has her coalfields.  Mr. BARTON:  Not necessarily Sydney.  Mr. LYNE:  That may be by-and-bye. It is a matter we have to look forward to  Mr. DOUGLAS:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  I think she will be called upon to give up more than Mr. Douglas thinks. She is the wealthiest colony in the group and has perhaps other advantages which will commend themselves to gentlemen present but I think we are here to conserve to some extent the interests of the States we represent as well as deal with questions in reference to the other States. As to the question of the franchise one gentleman said Why not have one House and one House only? I think there should be a difference between the franchise of the Senate and the House of Representatives and what that difference should be not as Mr. Barton suggested that the whole of each colony might elect its senators as one electorate; because I think if that is done it will be found only those who are men of means and who can command wealth will be able to get into the Senate.  Mr. BARTON:  The election just held was the cheapest ever held. I never spent less.  Mr. Lyne:  That was in consequence of the representative character of the honorable gentleman.  Mr. Barton:  No.  Mr. deakin:  It will be cheaper in large constituencies.  Mr. lyne:  I may turn to an example to the contrary. I think they had something of the kind in south Australia a few years ago and representatives to the Upper House were elected by the colony as one electorate. I believe exactly what I state is likely to occur took place here or why did this colony alter her system from on electorate to several?  Mr. Higgins:  Not because of the expense.  Mr. Lyne:  I am told that it was because of the expense and because only wealthy men could contest the elections.  Mr. Barton:  That was in the Conservative days of this colony.  Mr. Lyne:  If it was in the Conservative days of this colony why does she not return to it?  Mr. Gordon:  Population had too much power in the Upper House.  [161] Mr. LYNE:  Do you not desire that population should have power?  Mr. GORDON:  A fair power.  Mr. LYNE:  I think they should have all the power.  Mr. BARTON:  They mean that the city would have too much power as compared with the country.  Mr. LYNE:  Certainly. If you take the colonies of New South Wales and Victoria you will find the larger proportion of the population in and around Sydney and Melbourne and these two will dominate the remainder of the colony.  Mr. PEACOCK:  That was not our experience at these elections.  Mr. LYNE:  This election is entirely different to the elections which will take place for the Senate; and I am stating now my opinion only and I give to you what has been experienced demonstrated as it has been in this colony by practical result which should go a great deal further than any theory you can advance to prove what is likely to take place. I would like to see the senators elected from as many districts as the number of senators each colony has to return.  Mr. BARTON:  It would not then represent the State as a whole.  Mr. LYNE:  I think it would. My opinion is that there should be a difference between the House of Representatives and the Senate and this difference that the voting age should be raised so that instead of any elector of the age of 21 being allowed to exercise the franchise he should be 25 or 30 before he is privileged to vote for senators. That would make a great deal of difference and still carry out the principle of one man one vote. Now as far as the franchise is concerned I hope that this Convention will agree to it being equal for all the colonies not only for the House of Representatives but also for the Senate; and in view of the remarks of Mr. Holder-I agree with some of them in this particular-I cannot see how it is possible the first election is to take place other than upon the present franchise-a franchise which was described by the Premier of Tasmania as "a sufficiently liberal one." I do not know what he thinks is "a sufficiently liberal franchise." Where there is a £40 property qualification I do not consider a liberal franchise exists. You may depend upon it the qualification over all these colonies under Federation will he universal suffrage. And I would go further-  Sir PHILIP FYSH:  Everyone can earn £40.  Mr. LYNE:  A great many at the present time cannot. I also think we ought to provide in this Bill what the franchise in the future after the first election should be for the Senate as well as the House of Representatives; and I would like to say in answer to the remarks made by Mr. Holder that as far as I am personally concerned I would like to see it further extended as you have extended it in South Australia to women. That question ought to come up during this Convention. It is beside the question to imagine that if we are to have uniform federation we can have representatives from various States elected upon a different basis. We should enter upon all these questions at the present time and deal with them as they come before us. There is no use trying-  Mr. DOUGLAS:  What became of the lady who contested the election in South Australia?  Mr. LYNE:  I suppose she had not the requisite qualification or she would have been elected. That is beside the question. It is reasonable to expect the franchise to be even throughout the whole of the colonies. If it is not so trouble will arise from the very start. We must frame a Constitution from which there shall be no secession and one that will prove a binding contract between all the colonies or else the same troubles which arose in the United States when [162] States desired to withdraw from the Federation will arise here. We must also have a Constitution that can largely be built upon in the future by custom. The Constitution of Great Britain is not upon any hard and fast lines but expanded by custom and usage. We must therefore have a Constitution sufficiently elastic to be built upon and made stronger and more suitable in the future than we can possibly expect to make it at present. That being so we are called upon to exercise the greatest discretion and the greatest consideration. It is singular perhaps that we are carrying on this question almost at the same stage in our history as it was conducted in the United States of America. We are about 100 years old. So were the States of America a century old when they be-an to think upon their union in the same way as we are. It would not be out of place at the present time to point out that on that particular occasion when the Union was being considered the representation that was given to the Senate was this:  Originally Congress fixed the ratio of members to population and the House accordingly grew; but latterly fearing a too rapid increase it has fixed the number of members with no regard for any precise ratio of members to population. At present the total number is 329 being according to the census of 1880 one member to 154325 souls.  The original number was one member to every 30000 but afterwards that was increased to 50000. If the franchise is extended to women I propose we should have one member to every 100000; but if we do not extend that to women then we should have one member to 50000 only.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:  It is not a question of the number of voters but the population.  Mr. LYNE:  I thought I made myself clear on that point.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:  You are thinking it is one to so many electors. It will make the same number of votes.  Mr. LYNE:  The Premier of Victoria is right if it applies to the total population. I was only applying it to the number of electors. I will take it on the basis of population one member to 50000 which would return near eighty members as the House of Representatives; that would not make the House or the Senate with an average of six members from each State at the beginning of our Federal Parliament too large. If there is one thing more than another that the Australasian Colonies are afraid of it is that we will have a large House too extravagant and too expensive in its character. The desire is to reduce that House to as small a number as would be compatible with the work it has to do. If as has been suggested by Mr. Holder it is not to have the control of the Posts and Telegraphs or the Customs will there be need for a large House? Now it seems to me if we did not band over either of these to the Federal Parliament we might just have a few gentlemen sitting together as a Federal Council.  Mr. BARTON:  It is a question whether you would even want a Senate or a House of Representatives.  Mr. LYNE:  If Mr. Holder's ideas were carried out you would hardly want either. I think he would hand over the question of defence the question of quarantine and the question of a Federal Supreme Court.  Mr. HOLDER:  And the framing of a new Customs and Excise Act.  Mr. LYNE:  Framing one but not collecting the duties. They would not have much to do after the first framing had taken place. All the work then would be handed over to the various States to do it for the Federal Government. We do not want much in the shape of a Federal Parliament if that is all they are to do. But I desire to speak of a Federal Parliament which will have work far in excess of that referred to by Mr. Holder. I still want to see a Parliament not too large in numbers with a Senate certainly not more than half the size of the House of Representatives. If [163] we have for the former equal representation in the various colonies as suggested-some six from each colony-there will be about thirty or thirty-six say at the outside forty-two members. There would then be about eighty in Representatives. That is a fairly large House and yet not large. But if we went further and allowed the number of members to increase according to the increase of population we do not know to what extent that might go. We had a little experience of this in New South Wales a few years ago when an amending Bill was brought in allowing an increase in the number of members according to the population of the various electorates. As a result our House was brought up from about ninety members-before we knew where we were-to a House of one hundred and forty-one. Of course we had to reduce this number and get back nearer to the stage where we were before. In any Bill we may frame at the present time we must fix the maximum number.  Mr. O'CONNOR:  Make the House of Representatives bear a certain proportion to the numbers of the Senate.  Mr. PEACOCK:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  The Senate should bear the proportion to the House of Representatives as one-half. That is a fair thing to do.  Mr. PEACOCK:  You mean the other way about.  Mr. LYNE:  No; I do not. I want a Senate about one-half the size in number of the House of Representatives and the House of Representatives to be elected upon a certain basis to be described in the Draft Bill neither House to be increased but a maximum to be fixed by an amendment of the electoral basis for the House of Representatives. At the present time we have in New South Wales a limited number of representatives; but there is no limit as to altering the districts. There is however a limit to the number of representatives who can be returned and by that means only is it possible to restrict the number of members that will be returned for the House of Representatives. Also by doing that you restrict the number of members to the Senate. My idea of the proportionate representation in the Senate is to allow the smaller States a minimum number of representatives but not to equal that of the more populous ones. The proportion would be in comparison to the number given to the larger States. I had thought of a minimum of four to the smaller States and that they should remain at that minimum until their population arrived at the stage when they would be entitled to an increase.  Mr. WALKER:  How many?  Mr. LYNE:  They would have a maximum of eight. At the present time the colony of Victoria would be entitled to seven or eight New South Wales to seven or eight-I think to eight-and the other colonies of Tasmania South Australia and Western Australia would be entitled-two of them to four and the third perhaps to five the last-named being South Australia.  Mr. DOUGLAS:  Very good!  Mr. LYNE:  It is all very well for the smaller States to say "very good" in that sarcastic way. They cannot have everything their own way. (Laughter and hear hear.) If any of the States have a right to have their own way it is the larger States. I hear what Mr. Douglas has said; but what would happen if Victoria and New South Wales for instance decided to federate? The smaller States would have to come in. (Laughter.)  Mr. DOUGLAS:  They are free and independent.  Mr. LYNE:  It is all very well to say free and independent; but they would be compelled to come in if Victoria New South Wales and say Queensland federated.  Mr. BARTON:  Is that the spirit in which we are to consider it?  Mr. LYNE:  No; I am not saying that that is the spirit in which we should consider [164] it but I am saying in answer to interjections that such things could take place. I am not saying that they are going to take place because I am prepared to give consideration to the full to the claims of the smaller States.  Mr. DOUGLAS:  Very little.  Mr. LYNE:  If a very little a very just one. These gentlemen may have to thank us for less than I suggest before the thing is done. But that is by the way. I do not mean to say that the arguments used by the various speakers will not affect my ideas beyond those I have formed at present. If we did not come here to consider the views put before us we had better not have come at all.  Mr. HOWE:  You are well pronounced at all events.  Mr. LYNE:  For this reason I give expression now to my ideas because they are individual opinions and let them be combated by others. Equal State rights would be extremely unjust to the larger colonies of the group. There is another thing. If we are to have equal representation I would curb the power of the Senate. I would not allow it to amend Money Bills or reject Money Bills.  Mr. DOUGLAS:  Hear hear.  Mr. LYNE:  I am very glad to have the concurrence of Mr. Douglas because that would help to do away with the objection to equal State rights. Of course they have always the power of rejecting any measure sent up from the House of Representatives but Mr. Wise said he would give the power to amend Customs Bills. It is not a power given to some of the Legislatures at the present time and as it is in some respects a tax on the people the Senate should not have the power of amending line by line a Customs Bill. That would take away their power to a very large extent. I turn now from the construction and the powers of the Senate to another question which is one of those I take it likely to be fought very hard in this Convention and that is the question of handing over the various railway systems throughout the colonies. My opinion is that they should not be given over and I do not think it will meet with the concurrence of the States at the present time at any rate to hand over these railways to a federal control. I find the total cost of the railways throughout the colonies amounts to £94834000 and that they are yielding taking the average 2.97 per cent. It was stated by some of the representatives yesterday that it would cost £4000000 to equalise the gauge. Why it will cost nearer £20000000; and I will show how. Of course I am speaking approximately. We have invested nearly £100000000 in the railways; we have the 4ft. 8 1/2in. gauge in New South Wales the 5ft. 3in. in Victoria the 5ft. 3in. and 3ft. 6in. in South Australia 3ft. 6in. in West Australia; of course Tasmania is out of the question. Queensland if she comes in has the 3ft. 6in. gauge and will anyone who understands anything at all about railway Construction tell me if you are going to increase this gauge increase cuttings and tunnels to convert a 3ft. 6in. into a 4ft. 8 1/2in. gauge it will cost only four millions or even ten millions?  An HON. MEMBER:  Are the tunnels not large enough?  Mr. LYNE:  I know in New South Wales they are not for a double line.  Mr. HOLDER:  You have the 4ft. 8 1/2in. gauge there now.  Mr. LYNE:  In some of the colonies they are not. There are several things to consider. You have to equalise the grade in a great many instances to duplicate the gauge and to alter the curves. In Queensland the gauge is 3ft. 6in.; the cuttings and tunnels there are not large enough for a 4ft. 8 1/2in. gauge. Nor are they in some parts of South Australia.  Mr. O'CONNOR:  Broadening the gauge and altering the curves.  [165] Mr. LYNE:  There are tunnels and lines up and through mountains in various places with sharp curves and those who know anything about railway construction will not tell me they will not have to alter the curves. If it is to cost only £4000000 it should be done at once without hesitation but I say in my opinion it will cost three or four times as much as has been suggested to do the work. One reason why I object to the amalgamation or handing over of railways is because I think they are a subject for State rather than federal control. It will be more in the interests of the State Governments to extend the State railways than it would be of the Federal Government to do so. I am not speaking of Victoria or South Australia because they have extended their railways more than we have in New South Wales where we are only on the fringe of extension to properly develop the country. We have only 2600 miles of railway when we should have 10000 or 12000 miles and these works would be better carried out by the State than the Federal Government. There is one other thing that comes to my mind:   the resolutions infer there is to be no differential rate or as I may more properly term it preferential rate over the railways of any of the colonies and also the waterways. Now I should like to ask the framer of that resolution Mr. Barton how he is going to prevent a differential rate over the waterways of the different colonies when the steamers are held by private companies? Is it possible to prevent a differential rate? Take New South Wales which has differential railway rates to Bourke to compete with the water carriage from Bourke to South Australia. By this amalgamation of the railways and by doing away with the differential rates you prevent the Government of New South Wales obtaining any of the produce from Bourke as it does now. By federating you tie her arms behind her back and you allow the owners of the steamers by fixing low rates to carry the wool and the wheat down the river to Victoria and South Australia.  Mr. FRASER:    To Morgan.  Mr. LYNE:    I say to South Australia and Victoria; I do not particularise any spot. It seems to me to be an almost impossible thing to deal satisfactorily with this differential rating question. Mr. O'Connor very trenchantly put before the Convention the possibilities of dealing with the differential rates in the same way in which they are dealt with in the United States. If you are to do away with these differential rates I think that is the only thing that can be done. By the appointment of an inter-State commission giving it certain powers it would be a simple matter to deal with the question and would avoid the necessity which might otherwise exist of handing over the railways to the Federal Parliament. These are questions which will be taken up in Committee and the details gone into. There are however other aspects of this question. I have spoken of differential rates by private companies by land and have left out the rates between colony and colony by sea. This might act just in the same way. If the railways are run from Sydney to Brisbane from Sydney to Melbourne from Melbourne to Adelaide and perhaps from Adelaide to Perth differential water-carriage rates might absolutely ruin the whole traffic of the railways under the Federal Government. How is that to be overcome? These are questions which I cannot answer at present. If we are to do away with the differential rating system and to abolish the intercolonial tariffs how are we to have the essence of Federation while a railway barrier exists between the colonies? This is one of the first things to consider. How are we to deal with the differential rates between the colonies and not have the protective system under it while free waterways exist which allows of a differential rating system? There is another [166] question which was brought to my mind by the remarks of Mr. Holder-the question of State rights. How these small States would deal with us and almost wring our necks if they had the opportunity! Take the question put by Mr. Holder as to the waters of the Darling. Are we in New South Wales to be prevented from dealing with the waters of the Darling including flood waters because the smaller States think they want these waters? The waters are in New South Wales and we are not going to give up the right of utilising them on behalf of the producers of our colony.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    I am pleased indeed that the honorable the Speaker of New South Wales has told us that in dealing with these resolutions we are not and ought not to be debarred from dealing with questions of detail because I feel that if the committees we are to appoint are to do their duty properly they ought to be able to know the minds of the majority of the representatives here assembled and that being so I feel much regret that the three gentlemen who have already spoken have not given us the benefit of their past experience.  Mr. PEACOCK:    Hear hear.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    And the great knowledge they undoubtedly possess and that they seem to desire that those who are comparatively new to this movement should express their views without having had an opportunity of hearing from those who have had a much larger experience in dealing with these matters than many of us who are present. But as they have taken that position then I think it devolves upon those who have endeavored to make themselves acquainted [38] with the facts to place as far as possible before the representatives their views with regard to matters of detail which have hereafter to be dealt with. The Hon. the Speaker of New South Wales has said that we ought not to attack our friend Mr. Reid for his past opinions. We have come as representatives to this Convention and will have the benefit of hearing the views of other members and no member ought to be attacked should he see reason to change his views and should he see that the arguments be has had the opportunity of hearing have shown him that his preconceived views were wrong. The very object of adjourning for four months is for the purpose of getting as much light as we possibly can and if we change our views we are perfectly justified in doing so. I also regret that Mr. Barton in bringing forward these resolutions has not dealt with them in more detail than he appears to have considered wise. However perhaps it is beneficial that these resolutions should be somewhat vague because we can then pass them unanimously and have no recorded votes. I do not altogether agree with that for seeing that we have the right to change our views it would have been better if we had had some distinct statements which would form a foundation on which to base the various arguments. The first consideration which we all ought to keep before us is to accomplish Federation if we possibly can do justice to the various colonies we are sent here to represent. We ought to bear this fact in mind: we are not legislating here; we are merely negotiating. Whatever we do we have to take back to the respective colonies and their Parliaments will take opportunities of discussing the matter and suggesting amendments and then having discussed those amendments and having given them the full weight they deserve we have to go back to those who sent us here and ask them if they are prepared to agree to what we have done. We are free and open in this matter knowing that we are not passing an Act of Parliament binding the people we represent. One point to keep in view is that we ought to deal with all matters in a fair and equitable manner and take care that we properly represent the States which will form the various parts of federated Australia. We also by some means should represent the people directly as individuals - as individuals combined into one body. So that whatever laws may be hereafter passed by the Federal Parliament will require assent by two bodies - one as representing the States and the other as representing the people. Therefore I quite agree with Mr. Barton that it is absolutely necessary that we should have two Houses. I do not think it will be argued or even attempted to be argued that only one House will be necessary and therefore I will not bring forward any arguments why we should have two. Then as to the question of the Governor-General upon which such stress was laid by Mr. Barton I agree with him that the appointment should be made by the Queen and therefore I need spend little time discussing that particular portion. With regard to the senators and the members of the House of Representatives it will be necessary for us to ascer- tain what qualifications will be required by those we have to send there to represent us. One matter should be definitely and distinctly laid down and that is that there should be no property qualification required for either of those Houses or for the electors. With regard to the numbers I do not know that this is very material. We have before us certain suggestions in the Commonwealth Bill but I do not altogether agree with these because the numbers at all events at the commencement should be reduced as much as we can in order that we may make this new body as little expensive as absolutely necessary. It will no doubt be wise to provide as this will be a democratic body we hope that those whom we send there and who will have to devote a large amount of their time to carrying out [39] the work of the Federal Parliament should receive some reasonable remuneration for the work they will have to do for the people of the colonies. It will be admitted on all hands I think that if we are to induce the smaller States to throw in their lot with us we must show that we are not in any way afraid of their action hereafter. That being so whether it be theoretically correct or not we must be prepared to allow them to have equal representation in the Senate. If we look at other places we will find perhaps that that has not been followed out in its entirety. In America there is an equality; in Canada there is a kind of equality; in the German Empire we find there is not equality; and if we say it exists in Switzerland we must admit it does not exist in the same way that we are prepared to see it here. Although the larger States might fairly claim to have larger representation in both Houses seeing that what we must keep before us is the welding of the colonies into one whole we must be prepared to make some sacrifices. The larger colonies must be prepared to give to their smaller neighbors equal representation in the Senate body. One other important question is how we are to elect the senators and the members of the House of Representatives. With regard to the senators I am not prepared to give the power to the Parliaments of the different colonies to choose those who should represent the people in the Senate. The Commonwealth Bill did make that provision but when we come to consider the proposal we will find that there are many difficulties. In the first instance if we gave power to the Parliaments to choose how is that choice to be carried out? We in Victoria have two Houses. Are we to say to one House "We will allow you to select a certain number" and to the other House "We will allow you to select the balance." So far as my view is I think we should not allow more than six senators from each of the colonies two retiring every two years so that our Council would have to elect one senator and our Assembly the other-and we would not agree to that proposal. If we say it is to be a unanimous choice we may have grave difficulties. When one body has passed certain names as being the gentlemen who should be selected and the other says "We will not agree with you in that choice" then there will be a block. In America such difficulties appear to have frequently arisen and Acts of Parliament have been passed that where such a difficulty arises the two Houses should meet as one body to make a selection. That enables the representatives of the Upper House to combine with the members of the Opposition in the Lower House to over-rule the Government party in that House. I know that might occur in our colony by twenty-four members of the Assembly out of the ninety-five agreeing with the forty-eight from the Council; and so they would be able to over-rule seventy-one members who are supposed in their House to represent the views of the people. There being these grave objections to this proposal I think it will be unwise to place any provision in the Bill which will enable the Parliaments to make this choice. The argument in favor of it is that we will then have a body which will be the elect of the elected. That is a very good high-sounding phrase but is it true? We know that in many of the Upper Houses we have no elected body at all but a nominated body; and I feel perfectly certain of this that we will not agree to have a nominated Senate. I am sure it will be very hard to persuade the people of Australia-I know it will be to persuade the people of Victoria-that they are to allow anybody to have the right of electing for them those who are to represent their interests in the Senate. We must of course provide some means of dealing with the first election and that I think we can fairly do by saying that as we have thought it well to elect this Convention by the vote of the whole of the people in each colony we cannot go far wrong if the [40] Senate in the first instance be chosen on exactly similar lines. Then afterwards as the States are to be represented as States I would unhesitatingly give them the power of determining how their representatives are to be chosen. When I speak of States I must have it distinctly understood that I do not refer to the colony as a piece of land but I refer to those who possess the States-the people for the time being. And holding that view I say whatever choice be made by the States should be made by the people of the States and not by any Parliament that might be elected or nominated.  Mr. REID:    Hear hear.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    In our colony I should certainly advocate that while we were fixing the mode of electing or selecting our representatives we should allow the people as the occasion arises to make the selection themselves. That would be my view; it might not be agreed to by others but I should certainly think the people should choose either by the whole colony in one constituency or divided into a few large constituencies. Preferably I would say have one constituency. At the same time to prevent any class being shut out from representation we should endeavor to arrange such a mode of proceeding as would allow of minorities as well as majorities being represented so that all classes would have full representation in the House. Then as regards the House of Representatives-perhaps we should not call it the Lower Chamber because its members might not consider it the Lower Chamber-I think in all the colonies and in all parts of the world the tendency for some years past has been to enlarge the franchise so that every person who should be represented has an opportunity of being represented.  Mr. REID:    Hear hear.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    It would never do to allow in this Federal Parliament that those representatives who are elected upon the most liberal franchise possible should be outvoted by those who would be elected by a very limited franchise indeed. As this may fairly be regarded as the National House representing the people of the various States as a nation we ought to have uniformity in the franchise. We must leave it to the Federal Parliament to say what the franchise should be. At the same time as some colonies have given the right of voting to those who have not that right in other colonies it would be unfair and inequitable to take from any who have the right and therefore whatever uniformity is determined upon we shall have to allow the innovation that no person man or woman who has the right to vote shall be deprived of exercising that right even so far as the elections to the Federal Parliament are concerned. I would go the length of saying that everyone who has the right in the various colonies!if they!desire uo exercise theis franchise should have!the opportunity of doing so. I hold myself strong views with regard to the question of one adult one vote; but even though I hold those views and even though if that principle were proposed here I would have to vote for it still I do not consider that this is the proper place to settle the question. I think that each colony should be allowed to frame its own franchise based upon the franchise of the more numerous House until we have a uniform franchise framed by the federated Parliament itself. Under some Constitutions the power is given to frame a uniform franchise. It has been done in Canada and there is a similar power in Switzerland; but I would not lay down hard and fast lines. There is one point on which I think we are all agreed that is in having the election in the first instance on the qualification of the electors for the more numerous House and thereby we follow the only course we consistently can but we ought to make one declaration and that is that whoever has [41] the right to vote should vote once and no more. That has been determined in the Parliament of Victoria in discussing the late Federation Bill and it was determined also in the Parliaments of New South Wales and South Australia. I do not know how the other Parliaments dealt with the matter but the three colonies I have referred to resolved that they should have the principle of one adult one vote or one man one vote as the law of the land might be for the time being. Then we have to fix the proportion of representation according to the number of the population. A suggestion has been made of one member for every 30000 of the population but I think in order to reduce the expense it should be one for every 40000 or 50000.  Mr. BARTON:    One for every 40000 will give us the right-sized House.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    I think that would be ample. I should like it to be distinctly understood that as far as I am concerned I do not intend that we shall take 40000 people wherever we can find them and say "You shall have one member" as in many of the colonies and particularly in Victoria if we did so we would do a grave injury to the country and confer a benefit on the towns. I understand we are to allow each colony to fix what may be considered fair constituencies and allot the colonies one member for every 40000 of their population. We should also endeavor to make some provision for the settlement of deadlocks between the two Houses. We have found in all the colonies the difficulty of settling questions which may come into dispute and therefore we should endeavor if we possibly can to lay down some reasonable lines to settle the matter. Both these Houses will represent the people of the colony as their servants and the people will be the masters. When the two Houses cannot agree the proper course would be to let the people settle the dispute. We might try other means of doing this. We might try both Houses meeting together for the purpose of coming to a vote but I object to that proceeding. If we have to ascertain the views of our electors at present we have to dissolve the unfortunate House of Assembly whereas the cause of the trouble may be the other House. Let us have power to dissolve both Houses and let us ascertain the views of the people and if they can agree they will send back a majority on one side or the other; and if they cannot agree we may have another deadlock. The only true way of dealing with the matter-it is a novel proceeding and it is a proceeding which is not in force in any English -speaking part of the world but if we can adopt it in a workable form we should - will be by a direct referendum to the people; not that we should take a mass vote but should ascertain the wishes of the people by finding out whether a majority of the States are prepared to take a certain course and see if they contain a majority of the people. If we do that we will get back to bedrock. The best mode to settle deadlocks between the Houses will be to allow both Houses to go back to their constituents either by double dissolution or referendum and ascertain if possible what their views may be; but before taking such a step it would be wise and proper to see that both Houses have had full opportunity to confer and negotiate so as to obtain a compromise and only when such an effort has failed should they go back to the constituents. The next important point upon which I desire to express my views is with regard to the powers to be conferred upon the Federal Parliament and I may say here at once that I agree almost entirely with the provisions of the Commonwealth Bill. I think they have been very carefully framed and we may safely give those powers to the Federal Parliament; but we ought to scan them very carefully and see that we are doing no injustice because we must bear in mind that the powers we give to the Federation will be the foundation upon which the whole structure will rest. While we [42] should be prepared to give them every reasonable power we must see that these powers do not interfere too much with the domestic legislation of the States. In Canada and the United States entirely different modes of procedure were adopted. In Canada they gave the States certain specified and limited powers and retained to the Dominion all other powers not specifically conferred on the States. In the United States they gave limited powers to the new body allowing the States to retain power over all matters which they did not voluntarily give up. That latter course was followed in the Commonwealth Bill and it is the course that we if we are sensible will endeavor to carry out in framing the Constitution for the Federal Parliament. I am prepared to give the fullest possible power of taxation and borrowing to the members of the new Parliament. We must take care that when the necessity arises they have the power to do what is required. If they have not and if they cannot raise the money either by taxation or by borrowing then when they most require to be strong they probably will be found to be weak and I am prepared to trust them. Seeing that they are elected by ourselves and represent us I am prepared to entrust them with the fullest possible powers to raise money either by taxation or by borrowing. We must see that the new body has absolute control over the Customs and Excise duties and bounties. There are other matters which I need not go into. There is defence and quarantine and similar matters which will be placed under the Federal Government and in fact we may say all matters relating to the external affairs internal commerce defence and general government can safely be placed in the hands of the new body and the States can retain all the other powers which they now possess. One question which is one of great difficulty and to which we will have to give our earnest attention is how to deal with the railways of the various colonies. We have differential rates and if we allow these to continue the result will be that any colony through its railways will be able if it so chooses to practically nullify or nullify to a great extent any intercolonial freetrade which may be determined upon by the Federal Parliament. If this is so we must have some means to prevent any one colony injuring another colony's interests or acting contrary to the wishes of the other colonies. The mere construction of ordinary lines is a matter that I do not think we could hand over for it is closely associated with the land policy of each colony. We build our railways not for the purpose of getting profit out of them but to open up territory in our own colony and for the purpose of settling the people on the land. Therefore I think we could not in justice to our colony hand over to anybody the requirements of any particular part of the colony. If we come to deal with intercolonial lines that might be on a different footing altogether. As far as their construction is concerned I have no fear in saying that as the whole of the colonies would probably be interested in the building of any particular line then the whole of them might be fairly consulted with regard to that matter and therefore we might be able to abolish the want of a uniform gauge which exists at the present time and do away with the unfortunate cut-throat policy which obtains with regard to the railways in all the colonies. Thereby we would be able to benefit the people of the colony and be able to make large savings which will go far to meet the amounts we will have to raise under this Commonwealth. Another knotty point we will have to discuss is what are to be the powers of the respective Houses with reference to Money Bills. When we speak of Money Bills we use a term capable of the widest interpretation and in connection with all these measures with which we are familiar the term "Money Bills" is used for the want of a better denomination. With regard to the ordinary legislation I have no hesi- [43] tation in saying that each House ought to have equal powers. When we come to deal with the question of money I cannot go with those who desire to provide that the Senate should have co-ordinate rights with the House of Representatives when dealing with money matters. In all the colonies except Tasmania the Assemblies claim the right of having control of the purse. In South Australia the Council is allowed to suggest amendments and no doubt the representatives of that colony will give us information on the point as to whether it works well or ill in the general management of their colony. I believe that in Tasmania power is given to the Council to make alterations in Money Bills but if we look at the Constitution of the mother of Parliaments we will find that the Commons claims to have full control over all expenditure and imposition of taxation. I will admit at once that the Senate in this new Parliament will occupy a somewhat different position to that occupied by Upper Chambers in our ordinary Legislature. Is the difference so great as to justify us in giving up what is the law in nearly all the colonies and in Great Britain?  Mr. HOLDER:    A radical change.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    It is not of sufficient weight or influence to make us do that. I am prepared to listen to all the arguments to show me that my preconceived ideas are not correct and if they are of sufficient weight I will be glad to fall in with them. It is admitted on all hands that the power of initiation should rest with the House of Representatives alone but to my mind the better course will be to give to the Senate the full power of rejecting any proposal but not give them the power to interfere with the details decided upon by those representing the people? The Commonwealth is in a somewhat peculiar position in one respect and it will afford food for reflection for many of us represented here-the lawyers. (Laughter.) We know by one of the provisions that the courts of the Federation have full power to decide as to the validity of all the laws which may be passed. It is said that ordinary Appropriation Bills cannot be amended. It is very difficult for a Treasurer-indeed I do not know that there is any Treasurer here who will be able to do so-to give us a definition of an ordinary Appropriation Bill because in nearly every appropriation we have for the year there are matters which may be regarded as far as that year is concerned as extraordinary. Then we are asked to provide that the imposition of taxation should be dealt with in one Bill and that only one matter should be included in the Bill. Therefore if by some unfortunate slip both Houses being willing that a certain tax should be imposed two of a slightly different nature were included in one Bill it might and probably would be held by the courts which are always conservative that that law was ultra vires. Seeing the difficulties which stand in the way I think it is wise at all events at the commencement to see how it will work and to follow out the old lines on which we have worked and which have been fairly satisfactory and to say that there should be that great distinction between the two Chambers and that the ultimate power of dealing with all Money Bills should rest with the House of Representatives alone.  Mr. PEACOCK:    This is the way to get it all out.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    It is said that we ought to give the power of suggestion. Well I have had no experience of that but I do think if I were a member of the Senate and after fully thinking over a matter and debating it the Senate had come to a conclusion and made certain suggestions to the other place and the other place had treated them as they might-and possibly would-with contempt I should feel I was much more belittled than if I had only the power of [44] rejection. Rather than take the responsibility of swallowing what I altogether did not approve I would much prefer undertaking the responsibility of rejection. So far as I can at present see the right of suggestion is a power which I do not think it will be beneficial or advisable to give to the Senate. If deadlocks do arise-and they do and will arise on financial as on other matters-let them be settled in the mode we have provided for the settlement of ordinary difficulties. Let the people as the final arbiters say what their representative should do and no harm can be done if the people decide deciding not only as a people but as colonies.  Sir WILLIAM ZEAL:    When have these deadlocks arisen?  Mr. REID:    And where?  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    They have occasionally and unfortunately arisen in the colony of Victoria.  Sir WILLIAM ZEAL:    When?  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    During the last few years.  Sir WILLIAM ZEAL:    Of what character?  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    Do not let us quarrel amongst ourselves. (Laughter.) We ate in Opposition here apparently. Let us oppose everything from the Government side - (laughter) - and let the Government quarrel among themselves if they like but the Opposition should never quarrel. (Laughter.) I desire however to pass an as rapidly as I can as it is not fair to detain the Convention any longer than is absolutely necessary. The next question to consider will be the constitution of our Executive. There we shall have the Governor-General selected for us in the way referred to by Mr. Barton and if we start with five Ministers we will have ample for the work to be done instead of the seven as has been proposed. They will have to hold office during the pleasure of the Governor-General which means they will hold office so long as they can control the expenditure of Federation-that is so long as they possess the confidence of the House of Representatives. We are told that if we have responsible government it will kill Federation or the Federation will kill responsible government. But are we to assume at once that responsible government will kill the Federation? I am not prepared to do that. I am prepared to give it a trial. If we are to assume that and say we will have no responsible government but we will allow this new body to start on altogether new lines we will be entering on a course of which we know nothing. We have the experience of the other mode of proceeding and we may very wisely and sensibly commence on this particular line. If we find in a few years' time that these difficulties have arisen then we have the power to alter the Constitution but in the first instance I consider that the wisest course to pursue is to allow the Government of the Federation as in those of the various colonies to be what we all know popularly as responsible government. Give it a fair trial and if those difficulties have arisen and responsible government is going to kill or injure Federation then I am perfectly certain that the people will be only too glad to make the alterations and start on another line which experience will have taught us we ought to have begun with.  Mr. REID:    Hear hear.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    We must have Federal Courts of Appeal to deal with federal matters and also have A Court of Appeal to deal with matters from the Local Courts. The only question is whether we ought to make the decision of the Federal Court final. The right of appeal to the highest tribunal in the land is looked upon as the cherished right alike of the poor and the rich. It may be that sometimes the rich use it harshly against the poor but whenever possible a man has a right to appeal to the highest tribunal of the old country. That is a link we ought to be loth to break. The links are few now. One link is the selection of the ruler for the time [45] being and another is the right to appeal to the courts of England and these are links we ought not to lightly break. Before we adopt any measure which would result in a change in either of these two principles we should give careful and cautious consideration indeed to the whole question. As to the election of the Governors in the various colonies I say again that it would be unwise to give the Ministry the power of appointment or the people the right of election. If we gave it to the Ministry they might desire to give the place to a faithful supporter or to get rid of a dangerous opponent and in any case the occupant of the position would be regarded as a party man. If he were a Governor elected by the people he might say-"I am elected by all and your Parliaments are elected by simply a portion of the people" and difficulties might arise between him and his responsible advisers. It would be almost impossible to have a Governor elected by the people. With regard to that particular course we should again go by a well-known and beaten track and not start any innovations. One of the most important questions to be dealt with is finance and at the present time we have not before us the fullest information we could desire which we possibly could get by the appointment of committees to consider this particular question. We may look upon the question from a particular standpoint but if we are to have a lasting basis we ought to endeavor to fully consider and grapple with it and to get a safe foundation. We have to frame a Constitution fair and equitable to all the colonies. We have to see that it will be useful not only at present but in the future so that it must be elastic and we have also to see that while we take from the various States ample money to carry on the Federation we must leave ample means to the Governments to carry on their own domestic work. That being so first of all we have to look at what liabilities we are going to place on the new body and what revenue we will give them. We will give them Customs revenue which will be far and away more than sufficient to deal with the ordinary expenditure and will leave them a large surplus. I do not know whether any of the Treasurers here have had the pleasure of ever having had a surplus but it is a dangerous thing to have to deal with. If we are wise we will keep that temptation out of the hands of the Federal Treasurer. Many proposals have been suggested which no doubt will be thrashed out here and afterwards. We can start with this one certainty: that none of the colonies can afford to hand over all of this money without getting a large part of it back. We are all too poor to attempt to do that. This course was pursued in America and there they have such an overwhelming surplus that they find it difficult to decide what to do with it.   Mr. PEACOCK:    Not now.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    Well they used to have. We are not in a position to do it and we may dismiss that particular portion from consideration without giving it much thought. Another mode is that adopted in Canada where they give certain subsidies which in the first instance were looked upon as fixed amounts. What has been the result? Agitation sprung up and agitation continued and when the Treasurer brought in a surplus the States thought they ought to get a little more of the plunder and if we adopt such a system it must necessarily be so here. We know from experience that our municipalities are always pressing the Government to get as much as they can possibly get for their various works and if we adopt the Canadian system we will find that the States here will follow a similar coarse and make frequent demands for "better terms." The unwisdom of giving to any Legislature the expenditure of money which is not all raised from the people is apparent and strong pressure would [46] always be brought to bear on the Federal Government to expend the money they bad in their hands. I have seen it stated in one place that we should transfer other departments to the Federation-the Education Department for instance-but it seems to me that when we are dealing with the powers of the Federal Parliament and the departments of the State we should not deal with them as a financial question but on the broad question as to whether it is a good thing that the Federal Parliament should have control of various departments. One other matter is that of allowing the Federal Parliament to have this surplus and divide it. if we allow the Federal Parliament to have the surplus we will have extravagance. We allow them to deal with defences and post office matters and undoubtedly strong pressure will be brought to bear by every colony to have extra facilities with regard to the post offices and extra money spent on defences and we can easily realise that when the Treasurer has plenty of money to spend there will be a strong temptation to spend it.  Mr. BARTON:    Defence should cost less under the Federal Parliament.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    It probably will cost less but that does not alter the position that the various colonies will .demand to have extra money spent in order that the money may be expended in them. There will also be the temptation to court popularity by reducing taxation 'while they have money in their hands and seeing that there are all these objections I have come to the conclusion that we will be making a grave mistake if we allow the Government to have a surplus with which they can deal as they like. There is only one other course that I can .see and that is that we shall take care that the expenditure we place on the shoulders of the new body shall be at least equal to if not a little greater than the revenue we are going to give it. We can start with that and as the revenue will rapidly increase even if we are giving the Federal Parliament a little more expenditure than revenue at the start it will catch up the deficit. To do that I think we should transfer to the new body all the debts of the various colonies. The proposal laid down in the Commonwealth Bill and which was looked upon as a very good one at the time but which has since been shown (to be unfair in its incidence. provided for a scheme of payment of expenditure according to population and the division of the surplus on the basis of the amounts contributed by the various colonies. There is much to be said against a division of expenditure on the basis of population. Wine charges on a population basis would be fair and others would be unfair and the result worked out in figures would show -that some of the colonies would benefit very largely and benefit too at the expense of the other colonies. We have another proposition called the accounts scheme in which it is thought to be wise to keep some sort of accounts of the receipts and expenditure for each colony. On the face of it that seems fair and feasible but I do not think it would work We would have to keep distinct records; -we would have to keep a Customs-house on the borders of -each colony not to collect a tax but to collect information because we are told if duty is paid in our colony and the goods are ultimately exported to New South Wales that New South Wales must get the duty which is paid in Victoria. How accounts are going to 'be kept to do that considering that raw material may be brought into one ;colony and duty paid on it and then exported after it is manufactured into another colony I fail to see. How could the proportion of the duty to be taken by each colony be fairly apportioned? I cannot see how correct accounts could be kept and I may say that I have had some experience as Commissioner of Customs. It would lead to an expensive system of book-keeping and it would lead to an increase of the expenditure which would be [47] unwise. There is another objection. It would take away that supervision over the expenditure which is necessary because if the money is simply collected and the proportion of the expenditure charged to the colony interested the other colonies not having the same degree of interest in keeping down expenditure might agree to any expenditure reasonable or unreasonable which the colony more interested proposed to make. Then again we would have one body-the State-practically finding the money and another body-the Federal Parliament-expending it which would necessarily give rise to friction. Again at any time supposing a levy had to be made a State might turn round and say "You have been squandering the money given you. If you had guarded it properly you could have carried on with the means at your disposal and we will not give you any more." That position might be taken up by the Government of the day or by the local Parliament who might say "We will not tax our people to repay you money which has been squandered." On full consideration we will find that that scheme is impossible to adopt though I think from the figures I have seen the colony of which I have the honor to be one of the representatives would have no cause to complain because a large amount of duty would be credited to it and it would be impossible to ascertain the full amount thereof to be credited to the other colonies. Then we must not forget that when we have a uniform tariff it will make a difference in the amount of money to be collected. We will have a certain amount which will have to be raised but although we raise the amounts now we raise them on varying tariffs which each colony has adopted and when we take them all into one we may collect more or we may collect less. It will all depend on the basis on which we frame the uniform tariff and therefore it is not wise to say that the amounts we receive from Customs are so much and to calculate that in the future it will bear the same ratio in each colony. In the post offices also there are certain services which are charged in one colony and not in another. So that one colony will probably lose and another may have to collect more but in either circumstance the Federal Government will not receive the exact amount which is being collected at present. Another great difficulty is that we lose all our border duties as they will no longer be collected. The loss has been put down at from £500000 to £700000.  Mr. WISE:    £900000.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    There is no doubt the colonies will be able to send goods manufactured in one colony into another and the colony importing from abroad and at present paying duty will cease to pay. We will be sending from one colony to another a far larger amount of goods than we are sending at present and where these goods are dutiable at present we will in the future lose that amount. To be on safe lines we should put the loss down at much closer to a million. There are other matters such as the interest on the bonded debt to be taken over; and then we will have to provide for all the expenses of the Federal Parliament. We are told that we will save a large amount on our interest bill. Of course eventually we can save a large sum but we must not calculate that we will save the whole of the difference between £3 17s. per cent. on £180000000 and £3 per cent. on the same amount because in the conversion we will have to pay a large bonus as we will have to pay the market price of our stock and heavy expenses and so we will not save the whole of the interest. We will be benefited however if we can have this conversion as we will be able to have a stock in which trustees can deal as they will be allowed by the Imperial Parliament to invest in the federal consols which will come into existence. We will also get a better price and a better market value because when we are floating a loan there will be more customers. If we can make an interminable stock we will make great savings; but looking at all the circumstances we must remember that [48] in the first instance the savings will be small and we will have also to provide a sinking fund. I believe that the wisest course is to have as little disturbance in the State finances as possible and we should avoid friction between the State and the federal authority. If we can we should devise some means by which the whole of the various debts can be taken over and that appears to me to be the course we should endeavor to pursue. I do not go the length of saying nor do I concur with the views of those who say that it is necessary to transfer the assets. It appears to me that the British moneylenders do not lend us money on our railways or public buildings but that they lend on the general credit of the colonies and that being so there is no necessity to transfer the assets. I do not believe that for this purpose we need do it at all; but for other reasons it may possibly be wise for us to transfer the railways or to give some controlling power over them. In taking over the debts of the colonies I feel satisfied at the present time that we can easily leave the matter of the assets out of consideration. In all these matters we must try to follow out one rule and as we know that there are richer colonies and that there are poorer colonies the former must be prepared to make some sacrifice to allow the latter to enter this Federation. I do not mean that the richer colonies ought to be plundered or give up a large sum. but they ought to be prepared to say "We are desirous honestly and earnestly desirous to have this Federation brought about and to bring our smaller States in with us so that all of us may reap the benefit. We are prepared to obtain that larger end to make some reasonable sacrifice as far as we are concerned." We should speak with one voice and all communications either from the Federal Parliament or otherwise should go through the one channel-the Governor-General for the time being. An important point no doubt will be the question of the federal capital and it is a matter which we dare not attempt to fix at this time. It might be argued that it should be perambulating-wandering-from one colony to another.  HON. MEMBERS:    No.  Sir GEORGE TURNER:    Wandering from one colony to another with no fixed home. I do not believe in that; but I believe if we can leave the question of the uniform tariff to the new Parliament we can safely and without fear of injustice to anyone leave the question where the Federal Parliament is to have its home to the Federal Parliament. There is another important point I wish to speak on. We know we must not expect that all the colonies will come in at once with us and therefore provision should be made in the hope that in the near future colonies which at first remain outside may come in; but we should not make the way either too easy or too strict. This is a matter upon which I am not prepared at the present time to express a decided opinion. It is a difficult matter to be thrashed out. We are going to enter into a bargain and that bargain should be made binding as far as it should be reasonably binding but at the same time we must not forget that difficulties will arise in the working of the Constitution and troubles must ensue. Therefore we should take care that we have some reasonable mode for providing for amendments that may hereafter be necessary. If we make it too rigid we will have a Constitution that will not bend but will probably break. The States must have a means to ascertain whether amendments may be made or else we may have a repetition of what has happened in other places and bloodshed may ensue. If the States desire some amendment which they cannot get the opinion of the other States upon it may involve their desiring to leave altogether. I do not think we should make a Provision for the States leaving for once they join they should join for all time but they ought to know whether an amendment can be made. The Bill with [49] which an a rule I hold very strongly provides that any amendment-the slightest amendment-has to obtain an absolute majority of both Houses of Parliament and then by Convention has to obtain the majority of States. Well I believe we would be perfectly safe if instead of having an absolute majority we left the matter to be decided by a simple majority in each of the two Houses. I would consult the people but not by the roundabout method of a Convention for men would be elected to the Convention frequently upon mere personal grounds not upon the one particular point that might be at issue but because he was personally popular or because he was a gentleman who desiring a seat was in a position to travel throughout the length and breadth of a colony and advertise himself. If we want to ascertain whether any amendment ought to be made we can ascertain it by referring the matter directly to the people. I would be perfectly prepared to give to the people full control over all these amendments. It may be that if the one House desired to make an amendment the other House would block it. On the other hand neither House may make any move in the direction of amendment and in either of such cases if the colonies think the amendment ought to be made there is no reason why we should not give to the State Parliaments the power to move in that direction. If a large number of States decide in their respective Parliaments that amendments in the Federal Constitution in a certain direction of the States must agree to amendments. Mr. Barton referred to the Swiss to whom we can look for many useful lessons in dealing with this matter. If the two Houses under the Swiss Constitution agree that an amendment ought to be made it is referred to the people by way of the referendum. If a majority of the cantons and a majority of the people decide that the amendment is a proper one it is made. Apart from that under this Constitution 50000 inhabitants still have the right to call for the referendum to decide whether a change shall be made. It the referendum decides that there is to be a change both Houses give up their position and an election takes place. If the new Parliament decides that the amendment should not be made the matter will probably rest there; but if they agree as to what should be done it is only when the people approve of the amendment that it becomes law. This is a simple mode of procedure and one that we might adopt here. We ought not to give power to the federal body to alter the representation of a particular State unless that State agrees to the alteration. Here we have laid down a principle that the people are to frame the Constitution under which they are to live. Those who are to frame the Constitution should have full and ample power when an amendment is necessary to make such just as they have the power to formulate the Constitution finally. Those briefly are the views I hold with regard to the main principles upon which our Federation should be based. There are many other details I would go into if I had the time but it would be improper to delay the Convention and I reserve the full right to myself after hearing the arguments from those who have had greater experience than I have had in this matter to change the views I am now giving the Convention. I am here only as a negotiator not as a legislator and if I find that other opinions that will be advanced during the debate are more acceptable to the people of Australia [50] I will be only too glad to help to frame a Constitution in accordance with the wish of the people.  Mr. LYNE. -    I have not seen it. But I thought from what was stated before we adjourned for lunch that it was probable some suggestion would be made that might bring us nearer together. On this occasion I am extremely glad to find that the representatives of New South Wales are in harmony and I hope unanimous and I am very glad to be able on this question to support the Premier of New South Wales a thing I do not very often do.   Mr. PEACOCK. -    Perhaps he is wrong now.   Mr. LYNE. -    No; I hardly think he is wrong now. I think that for almost the first time he is right.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    When you do agree your unanimity is wonderful.   Mr. LYNE. -    But let me impress upon the Convention that we have to consider many things in carrying out the work in which we are now engaged and I think that not the least amongst those matters is the duty of preparing such a Bill as is likely to be acceptable to the people of these colonies. Now in framing this Constitution Bill I have thought from the onset that we were attempting to import into the measure too many matters and too many subjects and if the proposal made by the Hon. Mr. Gordon is going to be carried it will be the forerunner and I think it should be the forerunner of taking over our lands our railways our debts and everything else and practically relieving the states altogether from all matters of serious state consideration.   Mr. ISAACS. -    Do your debts affect other colonies?   Mr. LYNE. -    No I do not think they do; but I think that if all debts were taken over we would relieve the other colonies very considerably as far as their debts are concerned because of our stability.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    We do not want your debts. [96]   Mr. TRENWITH. -    That is because yours are the largest.   Mr. LYNE. -    I mention this matter not because I should support any such proposal but because I think the proposal is of such a vital character that if it is carried we should go still further. I hope it will not be carried. For the sake of seeing this Constitution Bill passed by each state I hope that this proposal will not be carried because I feel satisfied that even at the present time in New South Wales the advance which was made to South Australia at the tail-end of the session in Adelaide-that was to give rights over the waters of the Murray from certain points-is not viewed very favorably. If we go further and give absolute rights not only over the Murray but also over the Murrumbidgee the Lachlan the Darling and all the great tributaries which fall into those rivers-I think it is useless to say that if those rivers only are named it does not affect the large tributaries which fall into them. Why sir the Darling is supplied wholly or nearly wholly by large tributaries some of them in channels larger than the channel of the Darling itself. At the head of the Darling you have the Warrego the Paroo the Biree the Culgoa the Macquarie the Namoi the Bogan and a number of large rivers which go to make the channel of the Darling; not to make its channel only but to throw their waters for a width of 50 miles in flood-time over the lands of our colony. My honorable friend (Mr. O'Connor) alarmed me somewhat when he gave his opinion of the immense power which was given over these rivers even by the proposal carried at Adelaide. If I understood him aright he said that these rights extended not only to the Murray but to all the tributaries of the Murray. Every tributary I named just now is a tributary of the Murray.   Mr. OCONNOR. -    A tributary between certain points-a tributary between where it first forms the boundary between Victoria and New South Wales down to the sea; only that portion of it.   Mr. LYNE. -    Every river I named comes between those two points.   Mr. OCONNOR. -    No.   Mr. LYNE. -    Yes from where the Murray first forms the boundary between New South Wales and Victoria-that is up in the mountains-down to the sea.   Mr. FRASER. -    You are quite right.   Mr. LYNE. -    I presume that definition was inserted because otherwise it would be from the boundary of the colony of New South Wales to the sea only and it was intended to restrict I take it the power of the Federal Parliament over the Murray waters only in the channel of the Murray from its head to the sea. The honorable gentleman said that in his opinion that power was extended to every tributary of the Murray. If that opinion is correct there is no necessity for this amendment for that power already exists in the Bill. If that does exist then I venture to say if it is definitely understood and it must be definitely understood before this Bill is completed it will not be satisfactory to the colony of New South Wales. As the president for three years of the Royal Commission on Water Conservation in New South Wales I had something to do with the framing of a Riparian Rights Bill. The honorable member (Mr. Glynn) referred to the fact that a joint commission from Victoria and New South Wales reported to their respective Governments in favour of a combined commission to deal with the waters of the Murray. The honorable and learned member is somewhat in error. What did take place was that that Royal commission suggested that a joint commission should be appointed to take charge of the head-works on the head waters of the Murray. The reason why that suggestion was agreed to was that according to the Constitution Act of New South Wales we have power over the bed of the river only to the Victorian bank. We have [97] no power whatever to put a spade or a shovel into the soil on the Victorian side of the river and therefore we have no power to construct any works which would extend on to the Victorian side. Moreover it was known at that particular time that the Victorian Government was very active in constructing works to divert a large portion of the main tributaries of the Murray-and the main tributaries of the Upper Murray come from the Victorian side-over various parts of the colony of Victoria for the purpose of water supply and irrigation and it was thought by the two at any rate by the New South Wales Commission that that would have the effect of diverting into other channels a large quantity of water which then went down into the Murray channel and which would thus be lost to the Murray River. Considering all the conditions as they were then it was thought advisable that the Murray River only should be dealt with by a joint commission from the two colonies. It was upon that recommendation being made that a protest or rather an attempt was made by South Australia to get her finger in the pie; and Sir Henry Parkes who I think led the Government of New South Wales at that time refused to agree to any proposal which would give South Australia the same right as Victoria or New South Wales with regard to the Upper Murray. The banks of all the channels to which I have referred other than the Murray belong solely to New South Wales. It is not a question of one side of the river belonging to Victoria or to South Australia and of another side belonging to New South Wales. In the case of all these large tributaries on the New South Wales side they belong solely to New South Wales at the present time cause they are within the territory of that colony. New South Wales has completed a great many works for the purpose of storing the water of improving navigation and of irrigating considerable patches of country. These rights exist now and what this amendment desires to do is to take away a portion if not the whole of these rights from New South Wales.   Mr. SOLOMON. -    Hardly that.   Mr. LYNE. -    It is that and I will proceed to show as shortly as I can-and I think our speeches should be as short as reasonably they can be made-why I think that is the case. At the present moment I think I am right in saying the Murray is not navigable for a considerable portion of its course and we all know that it is not navigable nor as a rule is the Darling navigable for more than three or four months in any year. If that is so now and South Australia puts in a claim to have the whole of the water which is running into South Australia because she says the Murray below the border would not be navigable then that takes away rights we have at the present time to divert any of that water which in a dry time is so useful and necessary in New South Wales. By doing that you take away the possibility of New South Wales obtaining to the fullest extent the use of the water for irrigation purposes. It was very wisely observed by the honorable and learned member (Mr. Symon) that it is possible that the question of irrigation will take precedence over the question of navigation. I entirely agree with his observation.   An HONORABLE MEMBER. -    He added-You can trust the Federal Parliament for that."   Mr. LYNE. -    If we cannot trust this Convention we must be careful as to how we trust the Federal Parliament. The Premier of New South Wales pointed out I think with great force that the people of the colonies are watching the action of this Convention as some kind of a forerunner of what they must expect from the Federal Parliament.   Mr. SOLOMON. -    If it was assured that it would have the same personnel you would all be in favour of it.   Mr. LYNE. -    I am not sure of that. At any rate I should be very cautious [98] as regards this particular question as to how far I would agree to allow the Federal Parliament to deal with it at any rate for the time being; and by the term "time being" I mean this that I think the people of these colonies have to gain confidence in the Federal Parliament and in the course of a few years if that Parliament should become a reality the people of any state will be far more likely to hand over their rivers or their railways or their debts should that Parliament act in a manner which they approve than they are at present when they do not know quite what it is going to be or how it is going to govern.   Mr. ISAACS. -    That is the case with everything.   Mr. LYNE. -    It is the case with everything but I think there will very likely be more confidence in the course of a few years in the proposed Parliament than there is at this moment. The representatives of South Australia say they want the waters of the Murray to run into South Australia for navigation purposes more particularly than for irrigation purposes. What takes place now I understand is that each year those persons who have lands fronting the Murray in South Australia anticipate the flood waters to irrigate and fertilize their lands. They may desire that these flood waters should not be interfered with because they would lose the fertilization of the land which they now secure. Their representatives might go a step further in their argument. If at any time they make the channel to the sea navigable-I do not think it is navigable at present-they may say that they want the water to flow down the bed in sufficient volume to keep open that navigation. The great fault I have found in all the colonies hitherto has been that they have allowed so much of the valuable water of each state to flow to the sea instead of utilizing it for irrigation purposes. On every river when we have had a great flood instead of utilizing the water it is allowed to flow to the sea. It should be the object of every colony to utilize as much as it is possible to do. One gentleman has said that New South Wales has done nothing towards conserving the waters of the Darling or trying to make that river navigable. It is not navigable as I have said except for perhaps three or four months in the year; but already New South Wales has attempted to make that river navigable by building one weir and lock and it is intended to carry on this work and I think it will be carried on to its junction with the Murray. By these means instead of having a river which is navigable for only three or four months in the year we may possibly have a river which will be navigable at all times by storing the flood waters in such volume as to give depth.   Mr. FRASER. -    No.   Mr. LYNE. -    Yes I think it is quite possible. By doing that we do not in any way injure the flow of the river into the channel in South Australia. In fact I think that instead of doing so we are likely to keep up that flow to a more standard level than it is kept up to at the present time because the more the water conserved in and near the various channels in flood-time the more water will flow down the river at a dry time. I do not think therefore the South Australian delegates need have any fear that we are likely to injure the navigation of the river. But as was truly said by Mr. Carruthers this question is so bound up with our land legislation and with the improvement of the lands in our colony that the fact cannot and must not be ignored by any of the delegates from New South Wales and I hope that fair treatment will also be accorded to that aspect of the question by the delegates from the other colonies. Mr. Carruthers said that it was a case of a divorce taking place between the water and the land and so it is because in our [99] arid country we have land good enough for purposes of production; but in the western parts of our colony it is useless except during a good season unless we can utilize the waters to a greater extent than we have been doing in the past.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    What about the sunshine?   Mr. LYNE. -    We have that too and we do not thank South Australia or any of the other colonies for it.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    You do not appropriate it.   Mr. LYNE. -    We do appropriate it and it assists us very much. I may tell honorable members that a suggestion has been already made-and I do not think it will be long before it is carried out-under which something like £2000000 will be appropriated towards conserving the water at the head of the Darling and along its channels. In addition to that what we desire to have free power to do is to divert the flood waters perhaps for 50 or 100 miles from the Darling on each side into the depressions that exist in that vast and country. The Government of the day have done but little in this respect but private enterprise in some parts has done a great deal. I will just give one instance of this. There are two stations belonging to Mr. Tyson down on the Lachlan near its junction with the murrumbidgee and some years ago in a very primitive way he diverted a part of the Lachlan waters through a dry channel-in fact he either deepened or made the channel most of the way-40 or 50 miles into the arid back country where he was unable to keep stock until be carried out that work. In one depression alone which I saw myself he created a lake which at most times is 60 feet deep. Are we to be deprived of all the rights we have to do such useful work as this? Because unless we can utilize the water in this way a great part of our colony will remain unproductive or practically unproductive as it has been in the past.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    Does the water get back into the main current afterwards or remain there?   Mr. LYNE. -    Some of it will get back but a great deal remains. Of course where you fill up those immense basins it must remain or it is of no use.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    If that would stop navigation do you think it is fair?   Mr. LYNE. -    I do not think it will have any effect on navigation as it can only be done in time of flood or half-flood.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    Then the Federal Parliament would allow it.   Mr. LYNE. -    We can do it now and we do not want any Federal Parliament to interfere with our doing what is of infinite use to our colony. That is only one instance of the manner in which the waters in flood-time are and should be utilized. There are many schemes extending right up to the heads of the Darling to carry on this system to a very large extent and it cannot interfere with the flow of the river at any particular time. It is only when the river is very low-lower than it is at present-that any complaint can possibly be made. At this moment there is one place on the Murrumbidgee where the river is not more than 10 feet wide-between Hay and Narrandera-and the stream is scarcely running at all. Now if we give up our present power no one could use the waters of the Murrumbidgee under such circumstances as the whole of the present stream is required to flow down into South Australia. I do not think that Mr. Gordon in his speech which I have read although I had not the pleasure of hearing it showed one case of a Constitution containing the power which he desires to place in this Constitution.   Mr. GORDON. -    No other country has the same imperious necessity that we have to provide for this.   Mr. LYNE. -    I do not think that this is the only dry country in the world; I think there are other countries where they require to use the small supply of water they [100] possess to the very best advantage and I challenge the honorable member to show one instance where there is imported into the Constitution of any country the power he is trying to give the Federal Parliament here.   Mr. GORDON. -    The same might be said of a number of powers we are incorporating in this Constitution.   Mr. LYNE. -    I said just now that I think we are incorporating too many powers. The honorable member quoted some writers as to the moral right of those states below other states to get the full force and full supply of water which should come to them but in no case-not in Canada in the United States or in any other country-can I find or has he shown the existence of the power which he is trying to import into this Constitution. You are proposing to do something that we have had no experience of at all in the history of the world.   Mr. GLYNN. -    In the Californian Constitution there is a similar power as between individuals.   Mr. LYNE. -    That law exists in each state in Australia now as regards individuals. If one individual on a watercourse above another attempts to take away the right of the water flowing to the second individual of course he can be prevented by law from doing so.   Mr. GLYNN. -    Is not what is fair as between individuals fair as between one colony and another?   Mr. LYNE. -    I do not think the honorable member is putting the matter very fairly because in the colony of South Australia you have the Murray channel only-you have no tributaries. You have a   Mr. GLYNN. -    Oh yes.   Mr. LYNE. -    It may be so but I never heard of it. That being the case there is very little danger of any such course being taken by the state higher up as would reduce the river below navigation level. But I would like to point out to honorable members that there is a very important factor to which I referred at the outset; it is this-Supposing you import this proposal into the Bill and you lose federation as a consequence are you better off for carrying it than you would be by allowing matters to remain as they are and getting federation of some sort? It has been stated that it is possible to make a compromise. I myself cannot see that it is possible to make any compromise in this respect that would not give power to interfere with the supply of water that would be available for irrigation purposes. And if it is not possible to make a compromise that would prevent the interference with water for irrigation purposes it is not possible to make a compromise at all.   Mr. DOBSON. -    The Federal Parliament would not interfere improperly; it would give you ample justice.   Mr. LYNE. -    That may be so but the people of New South Wales at the present time do not know that it would be so and their votes would be likely to be out against a proposal which would make this a matter to be controlled by the Federal Parliament. They know what their rights are now; they do not know what they might be then. Now I would like to say one word with reference to an interjection which I made when Mr. Symon was speaking and which I do not think he took in the spirit in which it was intended. He was stating that the proposal did not desire to take away a right which now exists and I made an interjection to show that we have is New South Wales as you have in Victoria the right to deal with or use for irrigation purposes any water flowing through our territory. I said that if there was an attempt at interference at the present moment by any of the other states with that right it would very soon be proved what our rights were [101] and I say now that if you do not desire to   take away any rights that exist at the present moment you do not desire to interfere with irrigation or with the diversion of water in any possible way. We can in the colony of New South Wales divert water from the Namoi from the Darling from any of the branches I have referred to from the Lachlan from the Murrumbidgee or from the Murray. If you insert this provision in the Constitution the state of New South Wales will not have that power.   Mr. ISAACS. -    If you apply that principle to every subject there could be no Federal Constitution at all.   Mr. LYNE. -    I am now only arguing in answer to the remarks of Mr. Symon. He said he did not intend or the South Australian delegates did not intend to take away any right which exists at the present time but they cannot possibly introduce a proposal of this kind without taking away a very strong right which exists and one of those rights which are the life-blood of our colony as far as increasing its production is concerned. We have added practically a new state to New South Wales in the discovery and development of artesian water supply. Every one who knows anything of the interior of our colony knows what a great boon that has been to us but it is not sufficient to develop our colony to the extent that it will stand development or to which it should be developed and we want the flood waters for utilization to a greater extent than the artesian water can be utilized. I admit that this question of irrigation is one which must grow. It cannot be carried out in a day or in a week. It must be years before it will grow to that stage when it will be utilized to the fullest extent and it would be an unwise thing to attempt to do more than to let it grow in the manner I have described. But what has Queensland to say to this? Queensland has not I regret to say joined this Convention but the waters that are attempted to be attacked in New South Wales extend into Queensland. The heads of the Darling run very far into Queensland-up to Toowoomba and north up to the range which divides the Gulf waters from the southern waters. That being so do you think we are not now doing something towards preventing Queensland from coming into the Federation at some future date? If we frame a proper Constitution and agree to federate Queensland must come in and I have no doubt will come in in a few years if not at first. But you are now proposing to take a right over these waters of that colony whose necessities are similar to those of New South Wales and in doing that you are adding something to the Convention Bill which will assist to keep Queensland from joining the Federation. I agree with my honorable friend (Mr. Barton) in what he has said and I think the Right Hon. Mr. Reid has also said the same. It is not intended I believe to interfere with commerce in any way-with the commerce between the colonies. In New South Wales we have never placed a toll or a preferential duty on the steamers plying into South Australia or into Victoria in order to keep the trade to our own colony although I admit that a considerable amount of trade has been taken from our railways along the Upper Darling through the navigation of the Darling and the Murray being kept open by New South Wales.   Mr. GLYNN. -    A proposal was suggested in 1893 in the report of Mr. McKinney.   Mr. LYNE. -    A proposal was once suggested in Parliament but was not carried and we must only judge from what was done. If there are to be no preferential rates on our railways and if we are to have inter-colonial free-trade it would be a most unjust thing to attempt to wage a war of tariffs on our rivers when we did not wage such a war on our railways.   Mr. DOBSON. -    I do not think you could do it legally. [102]   Mr. LYNE. -    We can do it now.   Mr. DOBSON. -    I do not think so.   Mr. LYNE. -    We can put a differential rate on our railways.   Mr. DOBSON. -    But not a toll on a navigable river.   Mr. LYNE. -    I am not a lawyer but lawyers will support me I think in saying that there is no law to prevent New South Wales from putting a differential toll on the Murray or at any rate on the Darling.   Mr. SOLOMON. -    That shows the absolute necessity for Mr. Gordon's amendment.   Mr. LYNE. -    I am trying to show that there is no necessity for it at all because this has never been done although we have power at present to do it.   Mr. SOLOMON. -    How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds - Makes ill deeds done.   Mr. LYNE. -    We have gone to considerable expense in opening the water-ways as highways of commerce but we have never up to the present time attempted to put any differential rates on any water-way. The honorable member intends to include the Lachlan in his proposal. It has been said before-and as I have some particular acquaintance with the Lachlan I can say that it is true-that the Lachlan never has been navigable. It has never been used as a navigable stream and you could never make it navigable unless you made a canal 10 miles long from the Murrumbidgee to the deeper waters of the Lachlan and then you would have to snag the river and make it deeper before you could make it navigable. I emphatically say that as far as I can judge it would be a very great blot upon the Constitution and a hindrance to the acceptance of the Convention Bill when it is framed if you embodied in it a provision of this sort. It has been said that you only want to take rights which the Imperial Government have now. But sir I should like to know whether the Imperial Government would attempt in any way-they never have attempted-to dictate whether we should be allowed to take certain waters from the rivers for irrigation purposes or be restricted to a certain supply or whether we should make certain rivers navigable or not? I venture to think that the Imperial Government would never think for a moment of attempting to do anything of the kind. One word as to the Inter-State Commission. I do not think that we have yet decided what the powers of that commission shall be. There is a great diversity Of opinion as to whether the Inter-State Commission should have full power and sway over the whole of our railways regarding differential rates-I do not say preferential rates; I think they should have power over preferential rates; I cannot see any objection to the Inter-State Commission having power over our preferential rates only. But if you carry this amendment the result will be to place the rivers of the whole of the colonies under the Inter-State Commission as well as the railways of the colonies. I venture to hope that the proposal will not be carried out and that the good sense of this Convention will be such that it will allow this Bill to go to the people of New South Wales and the people of the other states in such a form that it is likely to be acceptable to them. But if you insert this provision in the Bill I do not think it will be acceptable. I believe that New South Wales will stand out altogether. Surely South Australia will not desire that; and that being so I trust that the Convention will permit the Bill to remain in such a form as will cause it to be acceptable to the people of the largest state of the group.   Sir JOHN DOWNER (South Australia). -    As this debate has proceeded there have been really two separate points made. One is the rivers of Australia treated as navigable; the other the rivers of Australia as used for other purposes irrigation or whatever the case may be. As far as [113] the first is concerned the Premier of New South Wales says it was never contemplated that there should be any interference with the navigability of that which is navigable. At the same time I cannot help remembering that he said that during some portions of the year or at times the river was not always navigable; that it was only a series of ponds and that there might arise doubts. However those doubts do not occur to me nor have I the fears expressed by the honorable member (Mr. Wise) with reference to the construction that might be placed on what is meant by a "navigable streams" I have no doubt that if it came to be a question of legal construction the meaning of the words "navigable stream would be taken in connexion with its surroundings and that the question would be decided from an American stand-point rather than in accordance with the decisions in England. The next question we have to consider now is not whether under the general Constitution this clause we have inserted is practically unnecessary and whether or not under the general provision of trade and commerce which contains all the words in the American Constitution we have all the protection we require. The question first of all is whether we should leave this entirely to judicial decision or when we are making a new Constitution we should place our meaning in plain and unmistakable words. Seeing that we are all agreed as to the intention of the Constitution to prevent one state from interfering with navigable streams so as to interfere with their navigability I do not think there can be very much harm in saying something that will convey that impression without our being forced to litigation and judicial decision. But the matter does not end there because as was pointed out exceedingly well by the Premier of South Australia the matter rests in these colonies on an alternative basis to which we have to give every consideration. It may well be in the future that the navigability of any river we have would bear no comparison in the interests of each of the states with its uses for other purposes. If we only use in our Constitution words providing that the rivers which are now navigable shall be kept navigable we may have to go through the complicated process which will be necessary to alter the Constitution before we can do what perhaps every man in the state thinks ought to be done. I listened with great interest to th   Mr. REID. -    Does not the Murray concern us?   Sir JOHN DOWNER. -    Not after it leaves New South Wales.   Mr. REID. -    We gave up some hundreds of miles of the Murray.   Sir JOHN DOWNER. -    I do not want to go into elaborations. I concede that New South Wales gave up something but they took a good deal more. They only began to give up something where the Murray bounded themselves and Victoria. They handed over to the Commonwealth the course of the river along that boundary and with equal generosity they handed over to the Commonwealth all the river where it belonged to South Australia and gave us or rather intended to give us nothing in return. I do not know that they did not give us something. I am inclined to think that as time went on and as appeals were made to the judicial tribunals it would be found that they had given more [114] than they intended to give up. But still that would be a bad understanding on which to make a friendly arrangement. We believe that they are giving up something they did not intend to give up; but I think that this agreement ought to begin with a perfect understanding and not with any of us having any well founded opinion in our minds that by the force of judicial decisions a result will be obtained different from what was intended at the time we made the agreement. Now there is no wish as has been said to interfere with the rights of New South Wales. I have no doubt that the Commonwealth will do every justice to that colony and I have no doubt that New South Wales will have the power in the Commonwealth to compel justice to be done to them even if there were any disposition on the part of some to do them less than justice; but I protest in the first instance against the supposition that the Commonwealth will be founded in injustice and will have no disposition to do justice to the different states and it is only in a secondary way that I put it that even if it was intended to do that injustice with the power that New South Wales would be able to exercise there would be no possibility of carrying such an intention into effect. The Murray runs through the territory of three colonies. Let it be the subject of the control which we have already agreed to on matters of much more importance and of more vital interest to us. Having shown all the trust we possess on those more important and more vital questions do not let us show distrust on this particular question which is as peculiarly a federal concern as any other matter within the four corners of this Bill and of as much interest to all Australia as the provisions with regard to free-trade and other things. We give the Federal Parliament power to pass social legislation of the highest importance; we hand over to them our dearest relation-the relations of parent and child; we give them unlimited power of taxation; we commit to them the whole of our commerce by telling them that they and they alone shall settle the bounds of taxation and other important powers and then forsooth we are to begin by distrusting them in a matter which may in the outcome prove infinitely small in importance or which may in the outcome prove large although I do not think it will but which though it prove unimportant may well produce infinite irritation. We are asked to hold our hands and refuse to transfer to the Federal Parliament the power to control the navigable rivers of Australia because New South Wales says-"We have the River Murray under our Constitution-how can we be interfered with?" Well we all have everything under our Constitutions and we are all handing over something-we are all making sacrifices. The very essence of the agreement is the handing over of jurisdiction that we exclusively possess and we only ask New South Wales who is already willing to make concessions infinitely greater not to let the sweetness of the agreement be interfered with by the possibility of friction on a matter of smaller moment like the one now under consideration. I agree with Mr. Kingston that we ought to go further than anybody has proposed up to the present time-that in the ordinary course of our natural life circumstances may occur that may make the navigation of our rivers trifling and contemptible compared with their importance for other uses; and therefore I think it would be well to so broadly frame our provision with regard to rivers as to preserve their navigability only so far as is necessary-to except from that liability the necessities of each state which may be found out and developed from time to time. From that point of view I beg to submit an amendment. If honorable members have any prior amendments-I do not know that they have-I will ask them to withdraw them to enable me to get a test by proposing as I now do the omission from sub-section (31) of all [115] the words after "The control and regulation of" with a view to the insertion of the words- all navigable streams but so as not to prevent the fair and reasonable use by each state of the waters thereof for irrigation or other reasonable purposes. The effect of adopting that amendment will be that it will be in the power of the Commonwealth to preserve the navigability of the rivers if they are navigable and the Commonwealth will have no control if the rivers are not navigable.   Mr. LYNE. -    Would that embrace all the rivers?   Sir JOHN DOWNER. -    I think it would be better to put no limitation. We do not know exactly where it will begin and how it will end. First of all I seek to make the primary object the preservation of the navigability of such streams as an navigable but at the same time should circumstances require it and the opinion of the Commonwealth sanction it to allow that navigability to be interfered with by the necessary use by each state of what is fair and reasonable for their own purposes. The effect of my amendment will be simply this-instead of having an appeal to the discretion of the Imperial Parliament to alter the Constitution and restrict the rights of any particular state that is so using its powers as to be injuring other states to give the Commonwealth that power. That is the cardinal idea that has been actuating us all through. We say-"We are brothers and we want to be fair and just. We will be fair and just and we will establish a Constitution on such lines that we cannot but be fair and just." And yet when this very subsidiary matter crops up New South Wales says-"We have got absolute power over these rivers" whereas they have not in reality because the Imperial Parliament can control their power. But the basis on which we all act on these matters of purely Australian concern is that we do not wish to appeal to the Imperial Parliament but to establish a Federal Constitution on just lines which will enable us to deal with our own affairs without appealing to anybody outside. It is from that point of view that I move this amendment not at all desiring to adhere slavishly to its words but quite slavishly to the idea of the amendment. I think we should not define any particular stream. I entirely object to defining the Murray. I entirely object to the provision as inserted in Adelaide. I objected at the time. I considered that so far from its being an extension of our authority it was a distinct limitation of it because under the general scope of the Bill we already had the control of the Murray and of every other navigable stream within the Commonwealth. so as to preserve the navigation thereof. That would follow from the other portions of the Bill. The only necessity of any provision being inserted was to insure the use of water for purposes other than navigation and when we inserted that provision we put a strong argument into the mouths of those who chose to argue that even as to navigability the River Murray in the colony of New South Wales was outside the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth and possibly we may have settled the question of tributaries or at all events have offered a strong argument that the Commonwealth would have no concern with the tributaries. Now I have no particular desire to see any words introduced in respect of the tributaries.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    But you want to cover them.   Sir JOHN DOWNER. -    I think that if a stream is navigable it must be made navigable from water supplied from somewhere else and when the Commonwealth has the control of the navigability of the stream it will have the control of everything that is necessary to make that stream navigable. About that I think there is no doubt. I do not want to use too many words in my amendment. I would like to use fewer words than I have done if any [116] honorable member can suggest them-the fewest possible words which will give the greatest possible jurisdiction covering words-and I only suggest these words because I fancy that they convey an idea which is in the minds of a great many members of the Convention at the present time. The New South Wales representatives say-"Certainly as far as any portion of the rivers in Australia are navigable empower the Commonwealth to protect the navigability of those rivers but as far as the use of the water of the rivers of New South Wales for irrigation is concerned you must leave us to ourselves." The result of that might be disastrous because if the commanding condition is that the navigability is to be preserved then New South Wales would not have the power to use the water they required for themselves and the results would be injurious to all. Therefore make the navigability of the rivers your first consideration but make this qualification of it that anything fair and reasonable-and the Commonwealth would be the judge of that-can be done by any state for the purpose of using the waters for irrigation or any other purpose even though it destroys their navigability. I think if we have an understanding founded on that basis we shall at all events begin well and we will have no necessity to appeal either to arms which we cannot appeal to or to the Imperial Parliament which I am sure we wish to appeal to as little as possible.   Mr. ISAACS. -    Does the honorable member's amendment include navigable streams   purely within a state?   Sir JOHN DOWNER. -    I thought at first of inserting the words "running through two or more states."   Mr. ISAACS. -    But I mean to say not open to interstate commerce.   Sir JOHN DOWNER. -    I think the power of the Commonwealth should not be limited. I do not think there is much fear of its being exercised unjustly. As far as my amendment is concerned I will be very willing to listen to any suggestions other honorable members have to make but I thought on consideration that to impose a limitation like that might be to raise very difficult questions and to very much interfere with the power which the Commonwealth can but need not exercise in its discretion and to limit the usefulness of that power at a time when we wish to exercise it.   Mr. KINGSTON. -    I think we must recognise that we have arrived at a very important stage in our deliberations and that the matter which is now under discussion threatens to divide us in a way which we would all desire to avoid. I rise for the purpose chiefly of suggesting that this is a matter on which we should take the sense of the Convention by division as a list resource only when all hope of amicable agreement and compromise fails. I am the more strengthened in this suggestion from the belief that the cause of the colonies interested which has been so ably put before the Convention by the various speakers who have preceded me only requires that careful consideration which I feel sure the Convention will be desirous of giving to it to insure a concession to their requests of everything that is fair and right under the circumstances. I am sorry to some extent that my right honorable friend the Premier of New South Wales spoke in quite the tone which he adopted. It seems to me to some extent that he did not altogether realize the reasonableness and substantial nature of our requests and I venture to put it that this is a matter to which it would be best to address our most serious consideration and not in the slightest degree to attempt to dispose of it with badinage sarcasm or anything of that sort. Therefore I shall purposely refrain from following some of the remarks in which he indulged. But I think that I ought to say with regard to the criticisms he levelled against my honorable friend (Mr. Gordon) that the position which that honorable member took up in Sydney in 1891 has by subsequent events been shown to be absolutely right. He may have been and very probably was foremost in suggesting then that it was idle to provide for the removal [92] of inter-colonial barriers to commercial intercourse in the shape of customs duties if we did not at the same time provide for the removal of the war of railway tariffs. The same importance was not attached by all members of the Convention to his remarks as the honorable gentleman himself attached to them but subsequent events have shown abundantly that he was right. I do not forget that one honorable gentleman who has been very emphatic in his denunciation of the proposals of the honorable member (Mr. Gordon) at the present time at an early stage in our meeting in Adelaide rose in his place and put it that it was idle to adopt measures for abolishing the war of custom-houses if we were only going to transfer the seat of war to the railway stations. Similarly I say here it is idle for you to adopt measures for abolishing the war of custom-houses and the war at railway stations if you are going to transfer that war to the river-side. That is what seems to me likely to be done if we do not adopt some amendment of the sort suggested by the hon. Mr. Gordon. The honorable member (Mr. Carruthers) has told us and rightly enough that this is a question of the greatest importance to New South Wales. I say also that it is of the greatest importance to South Australia. Arid as the territory in New South Wales may be the same remark applies with equal force to the territory of South Australia; and if by the action or enterprise of New South Wales we be deprived of those blessings in the shape of perennial streams flowing through two contiguous colonies which Providence has given us and if they are to be absorbed for the benefit of one or if the possibility of that be permitted we shall be making a great mistake indeed. I trust all honorable members will do what they can for the purpose of laying down this principle That as regards our river system where it can be properly termed of an inter-colonial character-important as it is in America where the streams are great and the necessities comparatively small; it is greater still in Australia where the streams are comparatively small and the necessities are indeed great-I do trust that we shall not separate on this occasion without having adopted a Federal Constitution which does provide that in the distribution of these natural bounties of Almighty Providence all must share and none must suffer. That I venture to say on behalf of South Australia is all that we desire-that that which is naturally the property advantage and opportunity of different colonies should not be absorbed to the benefit of any one. I should like to say to my right honorable friend the Premier of New South Wales that I am not attempting on this occasion to lay down any other principle more in detail than that which I have roughly indicated. What I am attempting is this: To act in furtherance of the resolution which was originally moved by the leader of the Convention in Adelaide; that is to take to ourselves as representatives of the people of Australia the power of dealing with this question which is at present possessed by the Imperial Parliament. So far as I recollect the resolution moved by the honorable member (Mr. Barton) was this:- That in order to enlarge the powers of self government of the people of Australia a Federal Government should be created with certain powers. What is the position to-day? On this matter New South Wales-to put it at its broadest simply as a question of law to say nothing of the equity-can exercise her rights in connexion with the waters of these rivers subject to the control of the Imperial Parliament which by legislation can provide what is necessary and fit on the subject. What we suggest now is that when we are calling into existence an Australian Parliament charged with the duty of dealing with this matter of inter-colonial concern-of Australian national concern-that the powers of the Imperial Parliament should be transferred to the federal authority which we propose to call [93] into existence. We de not suggest that they should be bound in the slightest degree as regards the mode in which these powers should be exercised. I would ask the Premier of New South Wales what does he object to in that?   Mr. REID. -    May I put to you this question. Even from your point of view do you justify the basis of this amendment in taking over irrigation in order to preserve navigation?   Mr. KINGSTON. -    I do not attempt to deal with this question in detail. We have not got sufficient information for the purpose of enabling me to state definitely on what lines the legislation should proceed. What I do say is this: That we ought to give to the Federal Parliament which we propose to call into existence the power when it deems fit to legislate on this question (giving either the preference to navigation or to irrigation I care not which just according as its wisdom may decide in the future) in order to remove this fertile source of friction between colonies. I put it to my right honorable friend in this way: I have no desire to refer to recent history in connexion with this river trouble but it is a live question; it is a subject which has already occupied the attention of several of the colonies interested. It is a matter on which we have addressed the Government of New South Wales with the utmost respect-and we shall be prepared to address them similarly in future-but without that fertility of result which we might have desired. Now the question seems to me are we when laying the foundations of federation with the necessary modifications which we hope will endure for all time to permit this question to remain beyond the possibility of being satisfactorily dealt with by that Federation and absolutely outside its jurisdiction and to be a constant source of friction and irritation which under existing conditions is has been found impossible to deal with? The Right Honorable the Premier of New South Wales has said that at various times and on various occasions the expression "Trust the Federation" has been used with more or less force. I confess that on a variety of occasions when I have used the expression I have used it most sincerely believing that we are engaged in calling into existence a body in which the whole of Australia shall have confidence. I put it to the right honorable member what will be the position if this jurisdiction which we seek is given? Simply this that if the Federation finds that it can interfere for the good of all concerned it will do so. If it comes to no such conclusion it will stay its hand. Which colony I ask has to run the greater risk? South Australia with its comparatively small representation or the senior colony of the group? But I put it on broader lines: Are we fearful of this Federation? For one I am not. I have every belief in the wisdom of the body which we are proposing to call into existence. If we are fearful that seems to me to be an argument for keeping out of it. My view is this that there is no cause for fear least of all on the part of colonies who will be so strongly represented in the house of Representatives as New South Wales naturally will be. I do ask honorable members not to pass by on the other side of this difficulty which if left unsettled and not referred to a tribunal of competent jurisdiction to be dealt with must be a constant source of that destruction of the feeling of inter-colonial comity. which should prevail amongst the various colonies that we have the honour to represent and a source of danger to the success of the Federation which we are here to constitute.   Mr. REID. -    Is not your only anxiety now to preserve the navigability of the river?   Mr. KINGSTON. -    I tell the right honorable gentleman this-that I would welcome any fair arrangement on the subject.   Mr. REID. -    Do you desire this power over New South Wales for irrigation purposes or for navigation purposes? [94]   Mr. KINGSTON. -    I desire it for the good of a   Mr. WISE. -    Is it navigation that you wish to preserve?   Mr. KINGSTON. -    If this water is useful for the purposes of irrigation as I believe it will be I think we ought to have our fair share of it too. I do not want that New South Wales shall under cover of an unlimited power of irrigation be able to leave to us nothing more or less than a dry channel.   Mr. REID. -    Therefore you want to take water for irrigation?   Mr. KINGSTON. -    I want New South Wales to concede to the people of South Australia and the people of Victoria under this Federation the same right with reference to the use of these waters as her courts would concede to the New South Welshman. Under this Federation I hope it will not be a question of New South Wales but of Australia-an extension practically for national purposes of our various powers. The present legal position on which I understand the Premier of New South Wales to insist with some degree of legal force is this: That outside the boundaries of New South Wales no person has any right to complain of what use the waters of the River Murray are put to.   Mr. HIGGINS. -    We cannot have war and we cannot have law.   Mr. KINGSTON. -    No we cannot have war because it is impossible for states which are component parts of the same empire to go to war; we cannot have law because the New South Wales laws do not run for the protection of those who happen to live outside that colony. All we can have is Imperial legislation conferring rights on all. And we do not want-we do not desire to go-cap in hand complaining to the mother country that our own fellow citizens of the British Empire-the people of New South Wales which properly enough rejoices in the proud designation of the mother colony-claim the right to absorb all the waters of the River Murray if it so pleases them. We are calling into existence a Federation within which we admit that custom houses should be abolished that wars of railway tariffs should be stopped and all I ask honorable members is to go one step further and say that as respects the use of what are Australian rivers Australian rights shall be regarded and that those rights shall not be limited by any provincial jurisdiction. If it were necessary to encourage my honorable friends from New South Wales I would ask them what have they to fear with the magnificent representation that that colony will have in the House of Representatives and equal representation of the states in the Senate?   Mr. HIGGINS. -    If you give to New South Wales the advantage of her larger population in both Houses I think the whole difficulty will be gone.   Mr. KINGSTON. -    As long as the existing law continues the existing position will continue. If the Federation does not interfere such rights as New South Wales claims at the present moment will remain untouched. A majority of the House of Representatives will be necessary to effect any alteration of the existing conditions and surely in a matter of this sort in which South Australia and Victoria are just as much interested as any other colony in obtaining a peaceful friendly solution of the question and are willing to remit it to the decision of a tribunal in which New South Wales is to be so strongly represented it is an unnatural apprehension on the part of the representatives of New South Wales to fear any direful results.   Sir JOSEPH ABBOTT. -    What about the tributaries?   Mr. KINGSTON. -    The tributaries? All I wish to say is this: for my own part I would be prepared to concede that so long as the navigability of the rivers in question is not interfered with I would not require any special reference to the question of irrigation relying on [95] the supply of water which is necessary for the purposes of navigation as being sufficient also for the purposes of irrigation although at the same time I do not omit to recognise that there may be a fine line drawn at a point at which the water may be sufficient for the one or the other of those purposes and not for both. But the question which now chiefly interests me is this-Cannot we arrive at some unanimous friendly solution of the difficulty? I do trust that this Convention will not adopt any other means for a long long time to come except as a last resource than an effort to secure by amicable negotiation that which we desire. I assure honorable members on the part of the colony of which I have the honour to be one of the representatives that we wish nothing more than is reasonable and fair. Embody any expression which may be desired by any honorable member of this Convention for the purpose of preventing us getting anything else and we will cheerfully agree to it. And I put it to honorable members that in framing a Constitution for Australia-a country in which as has been well pointed out by Mr. O'Connor water is a matter of absolute necessity not only for the comfort of the individual but also for the development of our resources-unless as regards rivers which may be truly termed Australian we make satisfactory provision for their use by the Australian people and prevent the possibility at any time of their monopolization by one or other of the colonies interested to the injury of the community the Constitution will be lacking in one of the chief recommendations for its acceptance by the Australian people.   Mr. LYNE (New South Wales). -    I anticipated from the remarks which had fallen from previous speakers that the last speaker intended to have made some definite suggestion to vary somewhat the proposition that has already been made by Mr. Gordon.   Mr. KINGSTON. -    Well you would not accept it anyhow.  